---
title: Unit 1.0 Introduction to foundation
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed
date: April 29, 2025
---

## Recap

In the basic training, we covered...

**Research data**
 - Understanding the characteristics and purpose of research data (unit 1.1)
 - Conceiving the research lifecycle as concept --> measure --> representation (unit 1.1)
 - Research data management (unit 1.2)
 - FAIR data principles (unit 1.3)
  
**Metadata**
 - Definition of metadata and the role of metadata in research (unit 2.1)
 - How metadata relates to data management and FAIR principles (unit 2.1)
 - Metadata in the data lifecycle (unit 2.3)
 - The role of metadata in data repositories and catalogues (unit 2.4)
      
**Metadata components**
 - Controlled vocabularies (unit 2.5)
 - Metadata schemas and standards (unit 2.6)

**Metadata creation**
- How to create metadata for an overall study (unit 2.7)

>[!NOTE]
> BO - when we say "overall study", do we mean catalogue level metadata? If so, I'd change it so the terminology matches across courses.

>[!NOTE]
>SW Instead of Metadata Creation - how about 'create your own metadata' to embed more personalised practical view of what theywll be doing for their own work - also links nicely to the wording used below
  
  ---
  
 ##  Aim of Foundation course

Now we have covered the main concepts, tools and benefits of metadata, the Foundation course will look at how to create metadata for your own research.

We will focus on your role as a metadata creator, exploring:

**How to create metadata**
  - Tools to create and capture metadata
  - When to create metadata 
  - Where to store metadata
    
**What metadata to create**
  - Identify what metadata elements to capture
  - Using metadata standards

**Creating metadata**
  - In the Foundation course, we will look at common metadata elements for the following areas:
    - Study metadata (unit 2.1)
    - Dataset metadata (unit 2.2)
    - Variable metadata (unit 2.3)
    - Question metadata (unit 2.4)
    - Codes and categories metadata (unit 2.5)
    - Concept metadata (unit 2.6)

We will look at creating metadata predominantly for quantitative, tabular data (data found in tables). We will also look at how you can create metadata for data collection instruments such as questionnaires and surveys.

---

## Who should create metadata?

All research should have some level of metadata to describe what the project is about and what data it contains.

What metadata you create, how you create it and who share it with will depend on the scope and aim of your research.

Broadly speaking, a metadata creation approach is influenced by whether you're working on a small project that does not plan to share it's metadata or data widely, 

>[!NOTE]
>SW - in the sentence above add 'or larger projects where you expect to share metadata more widely' to make it flow better re. the headings for the types of projects below

**Small independent project**<br>
If you're independently working on a small research project and will not not share you data publicly (or will only share it with a small number of individuals who have direct contact with you), then you may want a more streamlined approach to creating metadata. Your metadata will be mainly for personal use or referred to by a small number of people.

<details>
<summary><b>Benefits of creating metadata for personal use</b></summary>
<p></p> 

-	Helps you understand your data when you reference it in the future
-	Enables you build on your research when designing future projects
-	If you decide to share your data with other people, it's easy to access and understand

</details>

**Large research project with shared metadata and/or data**<br>
However, if you're working on a project that will be publicly discoverable and shared with a large number of people, you will need a more robust approach to creating metadata. 

Your metadata will be a vital tool in making your project findable and accessible by external people who do not have direct contact with you and/or the research team. In addition, if you deposit your (meta)data in a data repository or catalogue, you’ll need to ensure it meets the requirements of the repository or catalogue and that the metadata is standardised and interoperable.

<details>
<summary><b>Benefits of creating metadata for shared data</b></summary>
<p></p> 
 
-	Allows others who do not have a connection to you or your research team to discover and understand your study
-	Standardised metadata will make your (meta)data more interoperable and will enable you to deposit your data in respositroies and/or catalogues
-	Enhances transparency and trustworthiness of your data
-	Encourages more citations of your work as more people can discover, understand and trust your data
-	Saves you time answering queries about your data
-	As your study will be more discoverable and understandable, metadata encourages re-use of your data as well as cross-study comparisons
-	Promotes the FAIR principles, allowing you to implement best practice 
  
</details>

>[!NOTE]
>SW - will it be obvious that the person has to click on the 'benefits of...' tabs for more info once the course is up online? At first sight the 'Benefits of...' tabs looked to me like headings and I got confused about the paragraph appearing immedialtely under the title before I realised I had to click for the bullet points. Ignore if this will be obvious once complete though!

In the Foundation course, we will mainly be looking at metadata creation for small independent resarch projects. While the metadata elements we look at will be relevant for both small and large scale research projects, large research projects that wish to share their project more widely and deposit their data in a repository and/or catalogue will have to take further considerations in their metadata creation. That will often have to follow specific metadata schemas and templates that will prescribe metadata elements and their valid inputs.
