foundation/1.0 Introduction to foundation.md, before:

---
title: Unit 1.0 Introduction to foundation
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed
date: April 29, 2025
---

# Unit 1.0 Introduction to Foundation Course

## Overview

### Unit study time
30 minutes

### Recap

The following topics were covered in the 'Introduction to Metadata' https://closer-cohorts.github.io/understanding-metadata/introduction/1.0%20Module%20Introduction/ training course. If you are unfamiliar with any of the topic areas or would like a refresher then please  go to the relevant units as linked below. 

**Research data**
 - Understanding the characteristics and purpose of research data (unit 1.1)
 - Conceiving the research lifecycle as concept --> measure --> representation (unit 1.1)
 - Research data management (unit 1.2)
 - FAIR data principles (unit 1.3)
  
**Metadata**
 - Definition of metadata and the role of metadata in research (unit 2.1)
 - How metadata relates to data management and FAIR principles (unit 2.1)
 - Metadata in the data lifecycle (unit 2.3)
 - The role of metadata in data repositories and catalogues (unit 2.4)
      
**Metadata components**
 - Controlled vocabularies (unit 2.5)
 - Metadata schemas and standards (unit 2.6)

**How to create your own metadata**
- Creating metadata for your study (unit 2.7)
  
---
  
##  Aim of Foundation course

Now we have covered the essentials for using and understanding metadata including the benefits to yourself, others and the wider community, the Foundation course will build on this and will introduce additional foundational metadata principles. These are key to understanding how to manage metadata and data, before going on to how to make decisions about what and how to create metadata. Finally, we will look at how to create metadata for your own research.

We will explore: 
- List of units/topics

We will look at creating metadata predominantly for quantitative, tabular data (data found in tables). We will also look at how you can create metadata for data collection instruments such as questionnaires and surveys.

---

## Creating metadata in the Foundation course

In the Foundation course, we will explore creating metadata for a small research project that has produced tabular data. We will use an excel template to practice creating metadata. 

=== "For tabular data"

    While metadata can be created for any research project and data type, we will be focusing on **metadata for tabular data**. If you have tabular dataset you would like to create metadata for, have it open while completing this course. If you do not regularly work with tabular data, the metadata elements and concepts this course covers are still relevant across disciplines and data types.

=== "Based on a small research project"

    In the Foundation course, we will mainly focus on creating metadata for small scale research projects, with the purpose of personal use or sharing with project collaborators. 

    The metadata elements we explore will also be relevant to those working on large scale projects whose (meta)data will be widely shared, however, for these projects, you will have to take into account further contextual considerations such as discipline specific metadata standards, controlled vocabularies and data repository/catalogue requirements.

=== "Using excel"

    To practice metadata creation in the Foundation unit, we will use an excel metadata template. However, depending on your research project and the tools you chose to use, you may create and manage metadata using different software.

    While Excel is not an machine readable format itself, it can be exported into machina readable formats such as CSV or XML. However, this is only possible if the file follows a clear strucutre, data is clean and it doesn't rely on extra formatting such as colour, merged cells or notes.

You can download the metadata template for the Foundation course here **XXX**

---

Commit message:

Update 1.0 Introduction to foundation.md
Added metadata definition taken from unit 1.1

foundation/1.0 Introduction to foundation.md, after:

---
title: Unit 1.0 Introduction to foundation
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed
date: April 29, 2025
---

# Unit 1.0 Introduction to Foundation Course

## Overview

### Unit study time
30 minutes

### Recap

## Metadata: a recap

Before we look at creating metadata, let's recap what metadata is.

Try answering the following questions in your own words.

???  question "What is metadata?"

    Metadata is a form of structured data documentation that describes data. It gives the context needed to understand data and use it in a meaningful way. It is often referred to as 'data about data'. 

    CODATA descibres [metadata](https://terms.codata.org/rdmt/metadata) as...
    _Data about data. It is data (or information) that defines and describes the characteristics of other data. It is used to improve the understanding and use of the data._

    See unit 2.1 in the Introduction course for more information about metadata.


???  question "What are the features of metadata that differentiate from other forms of documentation?"

    Unlike other forms of free-text documentation, metadata is **machine readable** documentation. To be machine readable, metadata needs to be...
    - Structured 
    - Created and stored in machine readable formats
      - For example: CSV, XML, SAV, XLS, JSON, RDF, SHP

    By being machine readable, metadata is also **machine actionable**. This means we can use machines to organise and utilise the metadata at a larger scale. For example, by being machine actionable, metadata enables use to search and filter on platforms such as data repositories and data catalogues (see unit 2.4 in the Introduction course for more information about the role of metadata in data repositories and data catalogues)

---

The following topics were covered in the 'Introduction to Metadata' https://closer-cohorts.github.io/understanding-metadata/introduction/1.0%20Module%20Introduction/ training course. If you are unfamiliar with any of the topic areas or would like a refresher then please  go to the relevant units as linked below. 

**Research data**
 - Understanding the characteristics and purpose of research data (unit 1.1)
 - Conceiving the research lifecycle as concept --> measure --> representation (unit 1.1)
 - Research data management (unit 1.2)
 - FAIR data principles (unit 1.3)
  
**Metadata**
 - Definition of metadata and the role of metadata in research (unit 2.1)
 - How metadata relates to data management and FAIR principles (unit 2.1)
 - Metadata in the data lifecycle (unit 2.3)
 - The role of metadata in data repositories and catalogues (unit 2.4)
      
**Metadata components**
 - Controlled vocabularies (unit 2.5)
 - Metadata schemas and standards (unit 2.6)

**How to create your own metadata**
- Creating metadata for your study (unit 2.7)
  
---
  
##  Aim of Foundation course

Now we have covered the essentials for using and understanding metadata including the benefits to yourself, others and the wider community, the Foundation course will build on this and will introduce additional foundational metadata principles. These are key to understanding how to manage metadata and data, before going on to how to make decisions about what and how to create metadata. Finally, we will look at how to create metadata for your own research.

We will explore: 
- List of units/topics

We will look at creating metadata predominantly for quantitative, tabular data (data found in tables). We will also look at how you can create metadata for data collection instruments such as questionnaires and surveys.

---

## Creating metadata in the Foundation course

In the Foundation course, we will explore creating metadata for a small research project that has produced tabular data. We will use an excel template to practice creating metadata. 

=== "For tabular data"

    While metadata can be created for any research project and data type, we will be focusing on **metadata for tabular data**. If you have tabular dataset you would like to create metadata for, have it open while completing this course. If you do not regularly work with tabular data, the metadata elements and concepts this course covers are still relevant across disciplines and data types.

=== "Based on a small research project"

    In the Foundation course, we will mainly focus on creating metadata for small scale research projects, with the purpose of personal use or sharing with project collaborators. 

    The metadata elements we explore will also be relevant to those working on large scale projects whose (meta)data will be widely shared, however, for these projects, you will have to take into account further contextual considerations such as discipline specific metadata standards, controlled vocabularies and data repository/catalogue requirements.

=== "Using excel"

    To practice metadata creation in the Foundation unit, we will use an excel metadata template. However, depending on your research project and the tools you chose to use, you may create and manage metadata using different software.

    While Excel is not an machine readable format itself, it can be exported into machina readable formats such as CSV or XML. However, this is only possible if the file follows a clear strucutre, data is clean and it doesn't rely on extra formatting such as colour, merged cells or notes.

You can download the metadata template for the Foundation course here **XXX**

---
