---
title: Unit 1.1
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed
date: April 29, 2025
---

## Metadata: a recap

Before we look at creating metadata, let's recap what metadata is.

Try answering the following questions in your own words.

>[!NOTE]
>SW - I wonder if we could have the 'what is metadata' to include a visual with the definition below in the middle as the definitive one and perhaps descriptions suplied by others who have done the course to give that sense of other people who have been actively taking part? We could set up a shared padlet for people to add their definitions to at a click and pick off a few to display. Just a thought. 

<details>
<summary><b>What is metadata?</b></summary>
<p></p>
Metadata is a form of data documentation that describes data. It gives the context needed to understand data and use it in a meaningful way. It is often referred to as 'data about data'. 

CODATA descibres metadata as...
> Data about data. It is data (or information) that defines and describes the characteristics of other data. It is used to improve the understanding and use of the data.

See unit 2.1 in the Introduction course for more information about metadata.

</details>

\----

<details>
<summary><b>What are the features of metadata that differentiate from other forms of documentation?</b></summary>
<p></p>

Unlike other forms of free-text documentation, metadata is **machine readable** documentation. To be machine readable, metadata needs to be...
- Structured 
- Created and stored in machine readable formats
  - For example: CSV, XML, SAV, XLS, JSON, RDF, SHP

By being machine readable, metadata is also **machine actionable**. This means we can use machines to organise and utilise the metadata at a larger scale. For example, by being machine actionable, metadata enables use to search and filter on platforms such as data repositories and data catalogues (see unit 2.4 in the Introduction course for more information about the role of metadata in data repositories and data catalogues)

</details>

\----

---

## What metadata should you create?

You may be a researcher or student about to conduct a research project. 

Thinking back to the Introduction course, why might you want to create metadata for your research project?

<details>
<summary><b>Reasons to create metadata</b></summary>
<p></p>

Benefits of creating for you research project...
- Preserves your data and research
- Makes data management processes more robust and efficient
- Enables more accurate, reliable and higher-quality research 
- Helps your future self understand and reuse the data
- Helps others find, understand, compare, and use your data
- Increases the visibility of your study to other researchers and organisations
- Exploits the full potential of your data by supporting cross-study comparisons and secondary research

It may be required by ...
- Institutes (in your working contract or project agreements)
- Funding agencies may require metadata to ensure reusability of the data and that a project is meeting FAIR requirements
- Journals may specify metadata as a condition for publishing
- Supervisors may require metadaata in order to encourage data citations and enchance researcher reputation
- By certain projects that include collaborations across agencies and/or organisations

For more information about the benefits of metadata creation, explore unit 2.1 in the Introduction course.

</details>

\----

Now you know you want to create metadata, but how do you know what metadata to create?

There is no singular, universally-agreed set of minimum metadata standards. If you look on the internet, there are a variety of suggestions which are often discipline or resource specific.

>[!NOTE]
> BO - "minimum metadata standards" or "requirements"? Are we talking about the metadata elements here or the standard itself? Same below: "While there is no one minimum metadata standard,...". I think we're refering to the elements so I'd change to requirements.

With extensive metadata, your data is more discoverable, understandable and (re)usable. However, the amount of metadata you create can be a trade-off between time and resource.

So, how do we decide what metadata to create?

---

## How to decide what metadata to create

While there is no one minimum metadata standard, there are core metadata elements that are commonly used across disciplines. This covers high level metadata about a research project; the who, what, where, when and how of the research. Beyond this set of core metadata, what metadata you create depends on the scope and aims of your research project.  

<p></p>

**To identify what metadata to create, you could consider the following questions ...**

<p></p>

\----

**Sharing data...**
- Do you plan to share your (meta)data or is it for personal reference only?
- If you're planning to share your (meta)data, how widely will you share it? 
- Will the people who interact with your (meta)data have direct contact with you and/or your research team?
  (_note, sharing metadata does not mean the data has to be open_)

<p></p>

<details>
<summary><b><mark>Sharing data: metadata considerations</mark></b></summary>
<p></p>

**Personal use**<br>
If you're not planning to share your data, you will be the main user of your metadata. You can choose metadata elements that will help you manage and preserve your data. The aim of this metadata is to help you conduct your research efficiently and help your future self to understand the data you collected. 

**Sharing data**<br>
If you're sharing (meta)data with external people who don't have direct contact with you, your metadata needs to provide a standalone guide to your research and data. In this scenario, metadata has the additional purpose to make your project discoverable and understandable for other people. As people won't be able to contact you easily to clarify confusing or missing information, it's important to make sure your metadata is clear, standardised and comprehensive from the get go. This means you will most likely create more metadata than a project that does not share it's (meta)data. Tools such as metadata standards and controlled vocabularies will also be fundamental in ensuring your metadata is interoperable and (re)usable by yourself and others. 

</details>

\----

<p></p>

**Size of project...** <br>

- What is the scale of your research?
- How much data will you collect? How many different data collection methods will you use?
- How many researchers are working on the project?
- How many people will be creating the metadata?
- What time and resources do you have available?
- What software do you have available to use?

<p></p>

<details>
<summary><mark>Size of project: metadata considerations</mark></summary>
<p></p>

**Scale of research**<br>
If you're working on a large research project that handles a vast amount of data and data collection methods, you will need to create more metadata in order to effectively describe the different types of data and the processes undertaken to collect it. If it's a small research project, you will not need to create as much metadata.

**Research team**<br>
If you are working with a large research team, it is important to establish a clear metadata schema so metadata remains consistent and standardised. If there are multiple people creating, managing and using the metadata, following a schema will ensure the metadata remains consistent and easy to understand. If you are doing a solo research project, you may want to create your own metadata template. However, it can still be useful to follow a metadata schema and use controlled vocabularies in order to make sure your metadata is high quality.

**Time and resources**<br>
If you are working on a large research project, you may have more time and resource to create metadata. You could use specific metadata tools to help create and manage your metadata. If you are doing a small, solo project, you may not have the capacity to create extensive metadata or the access to metadata tools. In this scenario, it's important to prioritise the high value metadata for your research that support the aims of your project.

</details>

\----

<p></p>

**One-off or repeated study...** <br>
- Is it a one-off study or a repeated study?
- If it is a repeated study, have there already been completed studies? What will the upcoming studies cover?

<p></p>

<details>
<summary><mark>One-off or repeated study: metadata considerations</mark></summary>
<p></p>

**Repeated study**<br>
If you are creating metadata for a repeated study, it is important to consider what metadata was captured for previous studies, including what schemas or standards were used. You should incoporate previous metadata structures into the metadata creation for any new research in the series in order to make sure your data is interoperable. If it's the first study of a series, it's important to create a robust metadata schema that can be reused for future studies.

**One-off study**<br>
For a one-off study, you have more felxibility about what metadata you create and/or what schema you use as it only needs to serve the aims of that individual project. However, it is still important to consider how you can make your (meta)data interoperable with other research projects in your field.

</details>

\----

<p></p>

**Data repositories and catologues...** <br>
- Are you planning to deposit your (meta)data in a data repository and/or data catalogue?

<p></p>

<details>
<summary><mark>Data repositories and catologues: metadata considerations</mark></summary>
<p></p>

If you're depositing your (meta)data on data catalogues or data repositories, they may specify what metadata standards and controlled vocabularies to use. They may provide guidance or a metadata template/model, for example...
   - [CESSDA Data Model]( https://www.cessda.eu/Training/Training-Resources/Resource-crd-2592) maps out the required metadata elements needed to deposit a dataset in their data cataologue
   - [UK Data Service](https://ukdataservice.ac.uk/help/deposit-data/prepare-your-data-for-deposit/) gives guidance on how to prepare your metadata and documentation 


Even if you're not planning to deposit your data in a repository or catalogue, they can provide easy-to-acess guidance on what metadata elements to capture and a ready made structure. You can download their metadata templates and models to use as a basis for your metadata creation.

</details>

\----

**Metadata standards and schemas...** 
- What common metadata standards are used in your discipline?
- What metadata schemas are widely available?
  
<details>
<summary><mark>Metadata standards and schemas</mark></b></summary>
<p></p>

It is good practice to identify common guidelines around metadata creation in your discipline or for a specific resource you are creating metadata for. This includes identifying widely used metadata standards and/or schemas. These can either provide the strucutre for your metadata creation or inform the approach you will take.
<p></p>

**Using metadata standards for a large research project with shared data** <br>
Using a metadata schema and standard is essential when you are planning to share your (meta)data and reposit your research in a repository and/or catalogue. Scehmas and standards ensure that your (meta)data is interoperable and can be integrated into larger centralised systems (such as repositories and catalogues). Moreover, if you're working on larger project alongside multiple researchers, schemas and standards are great way to standardise the language you use internally, reducing the risk of confusion and miscommnuication.

<p></p>

**Using metadata standards for a small research project where data is not shared** <br>
Even if you're not planning to share your (meta)data, metadata standards and schemas will save you time in choosing what metadata elements to capture and what structure to follow. While you don't have to follow the metadata standard or schema in it's entirety, you can use it as a basis for your metadata creation. This will help you organise your metadata in a consistent way. For example, they can also provide definitions for metadata elements, valid inputs for metadata fields and controlled vocabularies so your metadata is clear and consistent. 

<p></p>

While there are a few cross-discipline standards and schemas, they are mostly discipline specific. If you're planning to use a standard, it's best to identify the one you want to use before you start creating any metadata.

You can refer to a list of common standards for different disciplines provided by the [University of Texas at Austin here](https://guides.lib.utexas.edu/metadata-basics/domain-standards). You could also use the [metadata standard catalogue](https://rdamsc.bath.ac.uk/search) to search available standards.

For more information about standards, take a look at unit 2.6 of the Introduction course.

</details>

---

## How to create metadata

**What software should you use to create metadata?** <br>
There's no singular software you should use to create and manage metadata. You can use any software that generates and supports machine readable formats. You may then export your metadata into text based formats such as PDF, in order to create further documentation but the original file must be **machine readable** (for example, CSV, XML, SAV, XLS, JSON, RDF, SHP).

>[!NOTE]
>SW I would add something in here explicitly stating that there are tools to help make metadata creation easier and quicker before continuing as below

There are tools and software that are designed specifically to generate, manage and store metadata. These tools can be particularly useful if you're doing a large project and need to capture extensive metadata.

**Metadata tools include...** <br>
  - Online tools:
    - [Dublin Core Generator](https://nsteffel.github.io/dublin_core_generator/index.html)
  - Free open source software:
    - [Collectica for Excel (standard)](https://www.colectica.com/software/colecticaforexcel/)
    - [Nesstar Publisher](https://www.ihsn.org/software/ddi-metadata-editor)
  - Commercial software:
    - [Collectica for Excel (advanced packages), questionnaire, designer](https://www.colectica.com/software/)
   
**You can further explore useful metadata tools here ...** <br>
- DCC provide a [list of metadata tools you can explore](https://www.dcc.ac.uk/guidance/standards/metadata/tools)
- UK Data service provide a [list of tools that can be used to explore and document data](https://ukdataservice.ac.uk/help/exploring-data/uk-data-service-online-tools-for-exploring-data/)

Metadata tools can provide different different functionalities, for example: metadata management, quality review, repository compliance checkers, metadata mapping tools. Depending on your needs, you may want to use more than one tool in your metadata management.

You can also simply create metadata in an excel spreadsheet. If you're doing a small one-off project, this may be all you need. Excel is an accessible machine readable format. In excel, you can create a table to document your metadata for a research project. 

>[!NOTE]
> BO - The FAIRwDDI metadata template is in Excel and is designed for metadata/DDI beginners as a starting point to creating metadata. It covers study and dataset/question level metadata. It might be good to link to that here, or at another appropriate point in the course? 

**Where to create and store metadata** <br>
Metadata can be stored in different locations. This includes ...
- in a spearate file alongside your data
- embedded in the data file

You may store metadata in one area or have both embedded and separate metadata files. It is important to keep a record of where your metadata is stored so you can easily extract it when necessary.

---

## Creating metadata in the Foundation unit

In the Foundation course, we will practice creating metadata, exploring common metadata elements. 

We will create metadata ...

**For tabular data**<br>
While metadata can be created for any research project and data type, we will be focusing on **metadata for tabular data**. If you have tabular dataset you would like to create metadata for, have it open while completing this course. If you do not, you can download teaching datasets to practice on.

Open access teaching datasets are available from UKDS, and a list of them are in the tab below.

<p></p>

<details>
<summary><b>List of Open Access Teaching datasets from UKDS</b></summary>
<p></p>

1. 2021 Census: Public Microdata Teaching Sample (England and Wales): 1% Sample: Open Access
2. British Social Attitudes Survey, 2021, Health Care and Equalities: Open Access Teaching Dataset
3. British Social Attitudes Survey, 2019, Poverty and Welfare: Open Access Teaching Dataset
4. British Social Attitudes Survey, 2017, Environment and Politics: Open Access Teaching Dataset
6. SN 7913 Opinions and Lifestyle Survey, Well-Being Module, April-May 2015: Unrestricted Access Teaching Dataset
7. SN 7912 Quarterly Labour Force Survey, January - March, 2015: Unrestricted Access Teaching Dataset
8. SN 8011 Crime Survey for England and Wales, 2013-2014: Unrestricted Access Teaching Dataset
9. SN 7932 Living Costs and Food Survey, 2013: Unrestricted Access Teaching Dataset
10. National Survey of Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles, 2010-2012: Open Access Teaching Dataset
11. SN 7140 Quarterly Labour Force Survey, January - March, 2011: Unrestricted Access Teaching Dataset
12. SN7146 ONS Opinions Survey, Well-Being Module, April 2011: Unrestricted Access Teaching Dataset
13. SN7216 Living Costs and Food Survey, 2010: Unrestricted Access Teaching Dataset
14. SN 6891 British Crime Survey 2007-2008: Unrestricted Access Teaching Dataset

You can download one of these datasets to practice metadata creation in the Foundation unit. In order to do this, you can download the dataset as a CSV or Excel file and download the user guide for the data so you have the background information about the dataset.

</details>

<p></p>

If you do not regularly work with tabular data, the metadata elements and concepts this course covers are still relevant across disciplines and data types.

**Based on a samll research project**<br>
In the Foundation course, we will mainly focus on creating metadata for small scale research projects, with the purpose of personal use or sharing with project collaborators. 

The metadata elements we explore will also be relevant to those working on large scale projects whose (meta)data will be widely shared, however, for these projects, you will have to take into account further contextual considerations such as discipline specific metadata standards, controlled vocabularies and data repository/catalogue requirements.

**Using excel**<br>
To practice metadata creation in the Foundation unit, we will use an excel metadata template. However, depending on your research project and the tools you chose to use, you may create and manage metadata using different software.

You can download the metadata template for the Foundation course here **XXX**

>[!NOTE]
> BO - Maybe we could actually use the FAIRwDDI template? I can see the draft you've created is quite similar, but ours follows DDI rather than Dublin Core, so it might be too focused of an example? I think you have access to the FAIRwDDI folder so you should be able to find it in there. Give me a shout if not!

>[!NOTE]
> Signpost to other training around metadata creation for other forms research data that is not tabular data 

[^1]: https://www.uu.nl/en/research/research-data-management/guides/during-research/metadata-and-documentation

---

## Using the metadata template

**Metadata template structure**<br>
The metadata template is strucutred into five tabs...
1. Project metadata (links to unit 2.1)
2. Dataset metadata (links to unit 2.2)
3. Variable metadata (links to unit 2.3)
4. Question metadata (links to unit 2.4)
5. Codes and categories metadata (links to unit 2.5)

In each tab, there are metadata templates with the metadata elements as the column header. Each metadata element is linked to a definition which outlines what the metadata element describes and the information it captures. While we are covering some common metadata elements, you can add more elements if you need to capture further information.  

If you add metadata elements it is important to define them, for example, what type of information the metadata caputres, the format of the data it records and its valid inputs. You can define the element yourself or you can reference a definition from a metadata standard, saving you time having to specify it yourself.

**Excel tools and best practice** <br>
You may also want to use tools to aid your metadata creation and management. For example [Collectica for Excel](https://www.colectica.com/software/colecticaforexcel/) is an add-on for Excel and includes pre-defined metadata elements where you can input your metadata direclty into the dataset file (rather than having a separate Excel file for your metadata).

Excel also has useful features that can help ensure your metadata is clean, well structured and standardised. For example, you can lock cells so that metadata element titles can't be changed or you can control what data can be inputted into certain metadata fields using data validation and and formatting tools. This allows us to implement contolled vocabularies in our metadata creation (to recap controlled vocabularies, go to unit 2.5 in the Introduction course).[1]

---

## How can we ensure variable metadata is high quality?

Thinking back to the Introduction course, how can we make sure metadata is high quality?

**Controlled vocabularies**<br>
Controlling what information can be inputted into a metadata field helps ensure that your metadata is consistent and removes the potential for human errors. You can create your own controlled vocabulary for a metadata field by listing a set of accepted values. Where necessary, you can also provide further definitions or information about the accepted values in order to remove any confusion.

**Using publicly available, community reviewed controlled vocabularies**
While you can create your own controlled vocabulary for a metadata element, you can also use publicly available, community reviewed controlled vocabularies. This saves you time creating extra documentation and also makes your metadata more interoperable as other researcher projects will use the same vocabularies.

For example, you could use ...
- DDI Controlled Vocabularies for social science research

You can also search [BARTOC](https://bartoc.org/) to find controlled vocabularies relevant for your research. For more information about controlled vocabularies and their role in metadata, visit unit 2.5 of the Introduction course. 

**Metadata standards**
You can also use metadata standards to make sure your metadata is structured in a clear and consistent way. Again, use a standard will make your metadata more interoperable with other research using the same standard. It will also save you time defining a metadata structure from scratch. So even if you are not required to use a metadata standard in order to deposit you data in a repository or catalogue, they are still useful tools to use in metadata creation.

For more information about metadata standards, you can visit unit 2.5 of the Introduction course. 

>[!NOTE]
> Should we tie the metadata tempalte in this course to DDI? If so, use DDI defintion and controlled vocabularies
> BO - I think it makes sense and if so we can def use the FAIRwDDI template if we want to

---

## Further resrouces around creating metadata

- Video explains the tools you can use in excel to implement metadata best practice: https://www.uu.nl/en/research/research-data-management/guides/during-research/metadata-and-documentation





