---
title: Unit 1.1
collaborators: Jon Johnson, Hayley Mills
date: April 29, 2025
---

# Unit 1.1 Why create metadata?

## Overview

!!! example ""

    **Unit study time**
    1 hour

    **Intended Learning Outcome**
    By the end of the unit, you will ...

---

## Overall reasons
See https://closer-cohorts.github.io/understanding-metadata/introduction/2.1%20Introduction%20to%20metadata/#benefits-of-metadata for benefits of creating metadata. 

Lets look in more detail how creating metadata could; 
- i make data management processes more robust and efficient, 
- ii enable more accurate, reliable and higher-quality research,
- iii help your future self (and others) understand and reuse the data (NB: need to demonstrate this in this section (or wider in the foundation), the other points are more self-explanatory and were demonstated in the intro (hopefully)).

## Example
To start, we will look through a hypothetical example dataset, where the instrument of data collection is a questionnaire, and which could have been implemented as part of a student project. 
The following units will then take a more detailed look into some of terms highlighted related to creating research metadata.  

Apples and oranges questionnaire and dataset. S:\IOECLOSER_Share\USP\Presentations\Training\Metadata_training_basic_2023\Metadata components\Draft Metadata components_v5_bo.pptx

## Question/Exercise
Think about what research questions might have been asked/what research questions could be asked from this data? What variables might you want to compare or not, how would you make these decisions?

In order to decide, you might think about - What is the variable about? How was it measured? What is being measured? Any transformation needed (e.g. converting from ounces into grams or recoding etc.)

## How does metadata help
Intuitively (from skills acquired/training) know what to look for about the variables. Now how do we capture this information and what terms might we use? Some of these have been covered in the intro and will be recapped here, some are new.

## How do we defining these 
Basic definitions of universe, concept etc…. 
…Reasons and examples of why you might want to document these…
