---
title: Unit 1.1
author: 
date: April 29, 2025
---

## Metadata: a recap

<details>
<summary><b>What is metadata?</b></summary>
<p></p>
Metadata is a form of data documentation that describes data, giving us the context we need to understand and interpret the data. It is often called data about data 
</details>

<details>
<summary><b>What are the features of metadata that differentiate from other forms of documentation?</b></summary>
<p></p>
Unlike other forms of free-text documentation, metadata is machine readable documentation. To be machine readable, metadata needs to be:
- Structured 
- Created and stored in machine readable formats
  - For example: CSV, XML, SAV, XLS, JSON, RDF, SHP

By being machine readable, metadata is also machine actionable. This means we can search and filter metadata on sites such as data repositories and data catalogues.
</details>

---

## How to create metadata

**What software should you use to create metadata?**
There's no singular software you should use to create metadata. As long as the software is machine readable, you can create and manage metadata there. 

If you want, you can keep it simple! You can create metadata with the software readily available on your computer now. You can create an excel spreadsheet documenting your data. If you are doing a small one-off project, this may be all you need. When creating metadata in this way, you will have to determine what metadata elements you want to include as well as ensure the metadata is structured and clean. In this course, we will look at creating metadata this way, including what metadata elements we should include and what tools we can use to make it is of high-quality.

However, there is other software and tools that can help you generate, manage and store your metadata. These tools are particularly useful if you're doing a large project and need to capture extensive information.

Metadata tools include...

  - Online tools:
    - [Dublin Core Generator](https://nsteffel.github.io/dublin_core_generator/index.html)
  - Free open source tools:
    - [Collectica for Excel (standard)](https://www.colectica.com/software/colecticaforexcel/)
    - [Nesstar Publisher](https://www.ihsn.org/software/ddi-metadata-editor)
  - Commercial tools:
    - [Collectica for Excel (advanced packages), questionnaire, designer](https://www.colectica.com/software/)
   
There are a wide range of metadata tools with different fucntionalities, for example: metadata management, quality review, repository compliance checkers, metadata mapping tools. Depending on your needs, you may want to use more than one tool in your metadata management.

You can further explore useful metadata creation tools here: 
- DDC provide a [list of metadata tools you can explore](https://www.dcc.ac.uk/guidance/standards/metadata/tools)
- UK Data service provide a [list of tools that can be used to explore and document data](https://ukdataservice.ac.uk/help/exploring-data/uk-data-service-online-tools-for-exploring-data/)

>[!NOTE]
> Are there any other tools that would be useful to signpost to here?

---
## How to store and manage metadata

**Format**<br>
Metadata needs to be stored in machine-readable formats, for example: CSV, XML, SAV, XLS, JSON, RDF, SHP. You may export your metadata in to other formats such as PDF so you can share information about data with other people. However the original format will be a machine-readable format, that can effectively structured and managed.

**Location**<br>
Metadata can be stored in different locations. This includes ...
- Metadata can be stored in a spearate file alongside your data
- Metadata can be embedded in the data file
- You may store metadata in one area or have both embedded and separate metadata files. It is important to keep a record of where your metadata is stored so you can easily extract it when necessary

---
## Creating metadata in the foundation unit

In the foundation unit, we will be exploring common metadata elements and terms. While metadata can be created for any research project and data type, we will be focusing on metadata creation for tabular data. If you have tabular dataset you would like to create practice creating metadata for, have it open while completing this unit. If you do not, you can download the practice dataset available with this unit.

If you do not regularly work with tabular data, this course will still cover useful metadata elements and concepts that are relevant across disciplines and data types.

For training purposes, we will create metadata in an excel file as we go along. However, depending on your research project and the tools you chose to use, you may create metadata in a different way/format.

Excel can be a useful starting point as it allows your to control data input into cells, ensuring your metadata stays structured and standardised.
For example, some useful tools could be:

- Locking cells so metadata element titles can't be changed
- Control data input using data validation and formatting tools

::: notes

Video explains the tools you can use in excel to implement metadata best practice: https://www.uu.nl/en/research/research-data-management/guides/during-research/metadata-and-documentation

:::

>[!NOTE]
> Signpost to other training around metadata creation for other forms research data that is not tabular data 

---

