foundation/1.1 Who should create metadata?.md, before:


## Creating metadata

### Who should create metadata?

What metadata you create and how you create it will depend on the scope, size and aim of your research. We will explore how to determine what metadata to create in the next unit. However, all research no matter it's size should have some level of metadata to describe what the project is about and what data it contains.

=== 'Small independent project'
    A small project that does not plan to share it's metadata or data will have a different approach to metadata creation to a larger project that intends to share its data and metadata widely.
    
    If you're working on a small research project and you're not planning to share your data (or will only share it with a small number of colleagues or collaborators), your metadata will mainly be for personal use or referred to by people who have direct contact with you. As such, you can take a more streamlined approach to creating metadata, documenting key areas of the project to help data management and understanding for yourself and others.

    !!! tip "Benefits of creating metadata for personal use"

        -	Helps you understand your data when you reference it in the future
        -	Enables you build on your research when designing future projects
        -	If you decide to share your data with other people, it's easy to access and understand

=== 'Large research project with shared metadata and/or data"
    If you're working on a project that will be publicly discoverable and will share it's data widely, you will need a more robust approach to creating metadata. 

    Your metadata will be a vital tool in making your project findable and accessible by external people who do not have direct contact with you and/or the research team. In addition, if you deposit your (meta)data in a data repository or catalogue, you’ll need to ensure it meets the requirements of the repository or catalogue and that the metadata is standardised and interoperable.

    !!! tip "Benefits of creating metadata for shared data"
 
        -	Allows others who do not have a connection to you or your research team to discover and understand your study
        -	Standardised metadata will make your (meta)data more interoperable and will enable you to deposit your data in respositroies and/or catalogues
        -	Enhances transparency and trustworthiness of your data
        -	Encourages more citations of your work as more people can discover, understand and trust your data
        -	Saves you time answering queries about your data
        -	As your study will be more discoverable and understandable, metadata encourages re-use of your data as well as cross-study comparisons
        -	Promotes the FAIR principles, allowing you to implement best practice 

---

##  Creating metadata in the Foundation course

In the Foundation course, we will be focusing on metadata creation for small independent resarch projects. While the metadata elements we look at will also be relevant for large scale research projects, large projects that wish to share their data will need to take further considerations in their metadata creation, such as data repository/catalogue requirements and relevant metadata standards, as well as create a more extensive set of metadata.

Commit message:

Update 1.1 Who should create metadata?.md
Added Metadata: a recap

foundation/1.1 Who should create metadata?.md, after:


## Creating metadata

## Metadata: a recap

Before we look at creating metadata, let's recap what metadata is.

Try answering the following questions in your own words.

???  question "What is metadata?"

    Metadata is a form of structured data documentation that describes data. It gives the context needed to understand data and use it in a meaningful way. It is often referred to as 'data about data'. 

    CODATA descibres [metadata](https://terms.codata.org/rdmt/metadata) as...
    _Data about data. It is data (or information) that defines and describes the characteristics of other data. It is used to improve the understanding and use of the data._

    See unit 2.1 in the Introduction course for more information about metadata.


???  question "What are the features of metadata that differentiate from other forms of documentation?"

    Unlike other forms of free-text documentation, metadata is **machine readable** documentation. To be machine readable, metadata needs to be...
    - Structured 
    - Created and stored in machine readable formats
      - For example: CSV, XML, SAV, XLS, JSON, RDF, SHP

    By being machine readable, metadata is also **machine actionable**. This means we can use machines to organise and utilise the metadata at a larger scale. For example, by being machine actionable, metadata enables use to search and filter on platforms such as data repositories and data catalogues (see unit 2.4 in the Introduction course for more information about the role of metadata in data repositories and data catalogues)


### Who should create metadata?

What metadata you create and how you create it will depend on the scope, size and aim of your research. We will explore how to determine what metadata to create in the next unit. However, all research no matter it's size should have some level of metadata to describe what the project is about and what data it contains.

=== 'Small independent project'
    A small project that does not plan to share it's metadata or data will have a different approach to metadata creation to a larger project that intends to share its data and metadata widely.
    
    If you're working on a small research project and you're not planning to share your data (or will only share it with a small number of colleagues or collaborators), your metadata will mainly be for personal use or referred to by people who have direct contact with you. As such, you can take a more streamlined approach to creating metadata, documenting key areas of the project to help data management and understanding for yourself and others.

    !!! tip "Benefits of creating metadata for personal use"

        -	Helps you understand your data when you reference it in the future
        -	Enables you build on your research when designing future projects
        -	If you decide to share your data with other people, it's easy to access and understand

=== 'Large research project with shared metadata and/or data"
    If you're working on a project that will be publicly discoverable and will share it's data widely, you will need a more robust approach to creating metadata. 

    Your metadata will be a vital tool in making your project findable and accessible by external people who do not have direct contact with you and/or the research team. In addition, if you deposit your (meta)data in a data repository or catalogue, you’ll need to ensure it meets the requirements of the repository or catalogue and that the metadata is standardised and interoperable.

    !!! tip "Benefits of creating metadata for shared data"
 
        -	Allows others who do not have a connection to you or your research team to discover and understand your study
        -	Standardised metadata will make your (meta)data more interoperable and will enable you to deposit your data in respositroies and/or catalogues
        -	Enhances transparency and trustworthiness of your data
        -	Encourages more citations of your work as more people can discover, understand and trust your data
        -	Saves you time answering queries about your data
        -	As your study will be more discoverable and understandable, metadata encourages re-use of your data as well as cross-study comparisons
        -	Promotes the FAIR principles, allowing you to implement best practice 

---

##  Creating metadata in the Foundation course

In the Foundation course, we will be focusing on metadata creation for small independent resarch projects. While the metadata elements we look at will also be relevant for large scale research projects, large projects that wish to share their data will need to take further considerations in their metadata creation, such as data repository/catalogue requirements and relevant metadata standards, as well as create a more extensive set of metadata.
