---
title: Unit 1.2 What metadata to creat
author: 
date: April 29, 2025
---
## What metadata should I create?

There is a vast range of metadata you could capture and many different ways you can go about creating it.

It's important that you create the right metadata for your research, addressing your research aims, scope and needs.

While more metadata makes your data more discoverable, understandable and (re)usable, the amount of metadata you create it is a trade-off between time and resource.

So, how should you decide what metadata to create?

---

## How to decide what metadata to create?

There is no singular, universally-agreed set of minimum metadata standards. If you look on the internet, there are a variety of suggestions as to what should be required as a minimum standard. Often this discpline or resource specific.

While there is no one standard, there are common metadata elements that are key in research data management. This core metadata captures who, what, where, when and how of the research. How you document these metadata may be defined further if you are using a particular metadata standard and/or controlled vocabulary.

:::
Minimum metadata: https://metadatagamechangers.com/blog/2020/12/23/minimum-metadata
:::

---

## Finding what metadata you need to create for your research

Beyond this set of core metadata (who, what, where, when and how), what metadata you create depends on your individual project. 
When deciding what metadata to create, you should consider:

**Scope and aim of research**
  - Is it a one-off study or a repeated study?
  - How many people will you share you data with? Is it an independent project for personal reference or will you make your data discoverable and available to others? If you're making your data discoverable to others, how widely do you want to share it? (note, this does not mean the data has to be open)
  - Do the poeple you are sharing your research with have direct contact with you and/or your research?
    
**Resources and time**
  - What software do you have available to use?
    
**Discipline and research field**
  - What are the common standards and requirements in your discipline?
    
**Repository requirements**
 - If you plan to deposit your research in a repository, they often specify what metadata they require. You can see the requirments for depositing data on the repository website. They can sometimes be called metadata models. For example:
   - [CESSDA Data Model]( https://www.cessda.eu/Training/Training-Resources/Resource-crd-2592) maps out the required metadata elements needed to deposit a dataset in their data cataologue
   - [UK Data Service](https://ukdataservice.ac.uk/help/deposit-data/prepare-your-data-for-deposit/) gives guidance on how to prepare your metadata and documentation 
  

---

## Metadata for a small one-off research project

If you're doing an independent research project for personal use, you will be the main user of your metadata. As you do not need your research to be discoverable by other people, you may not have to create extensive metadata. Instead, you can choose what metadata elements that will help your research processes. Creating this metadata will enable you to effectively manage your data and will help your future self to understand and use the data you have collected.

Even if the metadata you create is intended only for you, it is important to plan your metadata creation and management and follow best practices

If you don't follow metadata best practice, you may come across these challenges:
- Metadata creation becomes time consuming
- Metadata is confusing and inconsistent, losing meaning or value
- Metadata is unique to this singular project reducing its reusability in other research projects you do in the future or it's interoperability if you decide to share your metadata in the future
- Increase chance of human error
   
In this unit, we will look at some common metadata elements at study, variable and question level in order to help simplify this process and help identify minimum about of metadata to create.

---

## Metadata for larger research projects that will be shared

Creating robust metadata for large research projects is essential. If you are sharing (meta)data to people who do not have direct contact with you, you will need to make sure your metadata is clear, standardised and comprehensive. People will not be able to contact you to clarify 

Beyond the core set of metadata elements that we cover in this course, you may also need to capture further information.

Moreover, using tools such as metadata standards and controlled vocabularies will be fundamental in ensuring your metadata is interoperable and (re)usable by yourself and others.

---

## Using metadata tools to decide
Using tools such metadata cataologues, schemas and standards can help define what metadata elements to create, saving you time.

---

## Metadata catalogues and tools

Sometimes catalogues give advice as to what metadata to create.

For example:
- [CESSDA Metadata model](https://www.cessda.eu/Training/Training-Resources/Resource-crd-2592) gives a alist of metadata elements marking them mandatory, recommended and optional. It gives a description of each element as well as recommended controlled vocabularies.
- [UK Data Service](https://ukdataservice.ac.uk/help/deposit-data/prepare-your-data-for-deposit/) gives guidance on how to prepare your metadata and documentation 

Metadata tools can also help determine what metadata elements to capture. Even if you're not using that particular tool, they can provide useful guidance as to some of the core metadata elements to include. For example: 
- NESSTAR [Guide for data archivist](https://guide-for-data-archivists.readthedocs.io/en/latest/completeMetadata.html#good-practices-for-completing-the-variables-description)

---

## Using metadata schemas and standards to decide what metadata to create

Metadata schemas and standards are a ready-made framework for describing data and related information. It provides a consistent way to structure your metadata by using predefined fields with valid inputs, enabling sharing and comparing data across studies. 

Metadata standards tell you what metadata to document and what information to put in each field so the work is already done for you.

---

## Metadata schemas/standards and metadata creation (small one-off project)

Why use metadata schemas and standards even if you don't plan to share your data?

You may not have the time or need to use a full metadata standard or schema, however using one to inform you metadata creation will provide you with many benefits.

For example:

**Organising your research:** These tools help you organise your research data in a consistent way. It saves you time deciding what metadata fields to create and what input should be allowed as the standard alreadt specifies this. If you come back to your data in six months or years, clear metadata will help you remember what everything means and how to use it again.

**Clarity and understanding:** When writing a paper about your data, you'll need to explain your data collection methods and results clearly. Using a schema ensures you capture all the necessary details from the start, like how you measured “satisfaction” and what the scale meant.

**Future sharing:** Even if your research isn’t shared now, in the future, you may want to deposit it in a repository. If you use a common metadata standard from the start, the transition to data sharing will be smoother.

---

## Metadata schemas/standards and metadata creation (shared project)

If you want to share your (meta)data widely and deposit it in a repository or catalogue, using a metadata schema and standard wi
Moreover, if you're working on larger project alongside multiple researchers, schemas and standards are 

**Collaboration:** in larger research projects there will often be multiple people working with a dataset and managing/creating metadata. Metadata standards aids this collaborative working environment, ensuring you are using the same definitions and valid inputs for metadata elements and fields. This ensures your metadata is clean and high quality.

**Sharing your (meta)data:**

**Interoperability:** Standards also make your metadata interoperable, meaning it is easier to exchange, process, and compare information across systems and tools. The more people who adopt a standard, the more powerful and effective it becomes.

Example: An Excel sheet with your own labels might work for you, but depositing your data in a repository using a metadata standard makes it understandable and reusable by others, now and in the future.

---

## How to find the right metadata schema or standard 

[Using metadata standard catalogue](https://rdamsc.bath.ac.uk/search)

>[!NOTE]
> An exercise around finding a metadata schema/standard was already included in the introductory unit. Would it be useful to repeat the exercise here? How might we evolve or advance this exercise?

---

## Common metadata standards

While there are a few cross-discipline standards, they are mostly discipline specific. Even within a research area, there may be different ways of saying the same thing so a standard provides a common language so there is a shared understanding. 

Here are some common standards for different disciplines:

Arts & Humanities
- Categories for the Description of Works of Art (CDWA): CDWA is a standard for the description of art, architecture, and other cultural works.
- Cataloging Cultural Objects (CCO): CCO is a guide containing value standards for the description of art, architecture, archaeological artifacts, and other types of material culture.
- Text Encoding Initiative (TEI): TEI is most commonly used for literary texts or manuscripts in the field of digital humanities.

Library & Information Science
- Online Information Exchange (ONIX) for Books: ONIX is an international standard for representing and communicating book industry product information
- PBCore: PBCore is a metadata schema designed for sound and moving images.
- Preservation Metadata: Implementation Strategies (PREMIS): PREMIS is used for creating preservation metadata for digital objects.

Physical & Life Sciences
- Crystallographic Information Framework/File (CIF): CIF is a standard for archiving and reporting crystal structure data.
- Darwin Core (DWC): Darwin Core is an extension of Dublin Core for biological diversity data.
- Ecological Metadata Language (EML): EML a standard for the earth, environmental, and ecological sciences.
- Flexible Image Transport System (FITS): FITS is a standard used for astronomy image data.
- NeXus: NeXus is an international standard for neutron, x-ray, and muon experiment data.
- ISO 19115: ISO 19115 is an international standard for describing geographic information.
- OpenGeoMetadata (OGM) Aardvark Schema: OpenGeoMetadata (OGM) is a metadata schema for geospatial resources.

Social & Behavioral Sciences
- Data Documentation Initiative (DDI): DDI is an international standard for describing social science datasets which includes a metadata specification, controlled vocabularies, and tools for working with DDI metadata.
- Friend of a Friend (FOAF): FOAF is a standard for social media and is focused on the relationships that connect people, places, and things described on the web.

:: notes
List reference: [University of Texas at Austin](https://guides.lib.utexas.edu/metadata-basics/domain-standards)

:::

>[!NOTE]
> Could remove this and just link to resource that lists different discipline standards
---






