---
title: Unit 2.1 Study metadata
author: 
date: April 29, 2025
---

## Study metadata

As we covered in the Introduction course, study metadata captures information about the whole research effort. It may also list the datasets within a given project and how to access them. This metadata provides context on the who, what, when, why, where and how of the overall research project, and points to where the datasets can be located and accessed.

Study level metadata may also be called catalogue metadata, as it's the metadata often required by data repositories and data catalogues. This metadata helps users of these sites to understand and discover different research projects. 

_Screenshot of study level metadata - data catalogue page_

Study level metadata is also important for your personal records, even if you're not planning to deposit you data in a repository or catalogue. The metadata allows you to organise your research effectively, as well as preserve your historical research so you can come back to it at a later date and have all the necessary information to understand the project.

**Who should create study level metadata?** <br>
Regardless of whether you will deposit your (meta)data in a public repository or catalogue, all projects should capture study level metadata. Study level metadata is important for both discoverability (for others) and data management (for yourself).

**What project and dataset metadata should you create?** <br>
As we mentioned in the previous unit, while there is no universally agreed minimum metadata standard, there are come core metadata elements to include for the project level.

>[!NOTE]
> BO - Same comment as previous unit re: what we mean when we say "minimum metadata standard".

---

## Study level metadata

In the last unit of the Introduction course, we took a look at creating project metadata using Dublin Core.

>[!NOTE]
> BO - Change "project" to "study level" as this is the language we've used in this unit so far? 

Thinking back to this unit, can you list what project metadata you might want to capture.

<details>
<summary>Core project metadata elements</summary>
<p></p>

Below are some core metadata elements for project metadata. The elements marked with (R) should be considered required metadata that all projects complete. The elements marked with (O) are optional metadata that can be completed if relevant and necessary.

- **Title** (R)
  - the title of the research project
- **Creator** (R)
  - the creator of the data, this could be the PI of the project
- **Subject** (R)
  - e.g. keywords or topics
- **Description** (R)
  - e.g. an abstract or table of contents
- **Contributor** (O)
  - e.g. people or organisations who contributed to the research process
- **Date** (R)
  - e.g. the date range the research was conducted, the end date of the research etc.
- **Type** (R)
- **Format** (R)
  - the format that the data is stored in
- **Language** (R)
  - the language the data is stored in
- **Relation** (O)
  - any other publications or resources that are related to the project
- **Coverage** (R)
  - the geographical coverage of the research project as a whole

If you're working on a larger research project and you're planning to share your data, you may want to include more metadata elements, such as...

- **Funder** (O)
  - If the research project is recieving funding, the name of the organisations providing funding
- **Publisher** (O)
  - If the research project 
- **Access rights** (O)
  - If the (meta)data for the research project is shared online, you need to state the access rights to the data 
- **Identifier** (O)
  - If information about the research project and/or its data is available online, you should provide a DOI or PID to the online location

If you are depositing your data in a repository or catalogue, it is important to check the metadata requirements of those sites to ensure to capture any further metadata elements.

</details>

---

>[!NOTE]
>In Intro course I used **project** level metadata instead of **study** level metadata however I'm thinking of changin this to study level as well as DDI uses the term 'study' and I want the course to start reflecting DDI terms where possible
> BO - are we changing to "catalogue metadata"?
