---
title: Unit 2.1 High level metadata
author: 
date: April 29, 2025
---
## High level metadata

As we covered in the introduction course in unit 2.2, high level metadata contains information about the research project, providing context on what, when, why, where and how of the data.

Where might you find high level metadata?

You will often see study level metadata on data repository and data catalogue pages.

_Screenshot of study level metadata - data catalogue page_

It's useful to store high level data alongside your data files for your personal records. This allows you organise your research easily as well as come back to historical research and gain a quick understanding of what the project is about.

---
## Creating study level metadata

**Who should create high level metadata?** <br>
Regardless of whether you will deposit your (meta)data in a public repository or catalogue, all projects should capture high level metadata. High level level metadata is important for both discoverability (for others) and data management (for yourself).

**What high level metadata should you create?** <br>
As we mentioned in the previous unit, while there is no universally agreed minimum metadata standard, there are come core metadata elements to include for the study level.

Thinking back to the introduction unit, what metadata elements could we include in high level metadata?

Some core metadata elements:

1. Title	
2. Creator	
3. Subject	
4. Description	
5. Publisher	
6. Contributor
7. Date
8. Type
9. Format
10. Identifier
11. Language
12. Relation
13. Coverage
14. Rights

---

## Same term, different meanings 

Even within a research area, there may be different ways of saying the same thing. The way someone interprets the meaning of 'Date' and 'Creator' will alter what they put in that metadata field.

For example: 

What could 'Date' refer to?
- Date the research started
- Date the research ended
- Date the resource was published
- Date the metadata was published

What could 'Creator' refer to?
- Creator of the data
- Creator of metadata
- Person(s) / organisation(s)

What does 'Relation' mean in this setting?

If you don't define terms or terms are used inconsistently you will the utility of your metadata. 
What might be some of the challenges that arise?

- You don't know what the metadata is referring to, reducing the value of the metadata
- You can't compare the metadata with another study's metadata as they may be referring to different things
- You forget what definition you choose for a metadata element and don't know what your metadata is describing

As part of the metadata creation, you can define your metadata elements yoursels. For example ...

You can create this yourself, creating a metadata scheme that defines:
- Name of the metadata element
- Description of what it describes
- Valid input values

For example:
- Date
- Date the research was published
- dd/mm/yyyy

However, defining all your metadata elements independently can be time consuming. 

What tools can we use to ensure that metadata is consistent and structured?

Metadata elements: schemas and standards help you quickly 

Metadata input fields: controlled vocabularies  


---
## Example: Defining 'Date', 'Creator' and 'Relation' using a metadata standard

The core elements listed above are based on the Dublin Core Schema



---

## Tools to create Study level metadata
 
 - Dublin Core Schema
   - Dublin Core Generator (simple and advanced)
   
---

## Creating study level metadata

In the excel sheet create dataset metadata for your research.
You can also create the metadata 

