---
title: Unit 2.1 Project metadata
author: 
date: April 29, 2025
---

## Catalogue metadata

As we covered in the Introduction course, catalogue metadata capture information about the whole research effort (the research project), as well as the datasets within a given project. This metadata provides context on the what, when, why, where and how of the research project and its data.

It is called catalogue metadata as it's the metadata often required by data repositories and data catalogues. This metadata helps users of these sites to understand and discover different datasets.

_Screenshot of study level metadata - data catalogue page_

While it is called catalogue metedata, this type of metadata is useful and important for your personal records, even if you're not planning to deposit you data in a repository or catalogue. The metadata allows you organise your research effectively as well as preserve your historical research so you can come back to it at a later and have all the necessary information to understand the project.

**Who should create catalogue metadata?** <br>
Regardless of whether you will deposit your (meta)data in a public repository or catalogue, all projects should capture catalogue metadata. Catalogue metadata is important for both discoverability (for others) and data management (for yourself).

**What project and dataset metadata should you create?** <br>
As we mentioned in the previous unit, while there is no universally agreed minimum metadata standard, there are come core metadata elements to include for the project level.

In this unit, we'll break catalogue metadata down into **project** metadata which describes the project as a whole, and **dataset** metdata which describes an individual dataset within a project.

---
## Project metadata

In the last unit of the Introduction course, we took a look at creating project metadata using Dublin Core.

Thinking back to this unit, can you list what project metadata you might want to capture.

<details>
<summary>Core project metadata elements</summary>
<p></p>

- **Title**
  - the title of the research project
- **Creator**
  - the creator of the data, this could be the PI of the project
- **Subject**
  - e.g. keywords or topics
- **Description**
  - e.g. an abstract or table of contents
- **Contributor**
  - e.g. people or organisations who contributed to the research process
- **Date**
  - e.g. the date range the research was conducted, the end date of the research etc.
- **Type**
- **Format**
  - the format that the data is stored in
- **Language**
  - the language the data is stored in
- **Relation**
  - any other publications or resources that are related to the project
- **Coverage**
  - the geographical coverage of the research project as a whole

If you're working on a larger research project and you're planning to share your data, you may want to include more metadata elements, such as...

- **Funder**
  - If the research project is recieving funding, the name of the organisations providing funding
- **Publisher**
  - If the research project 
- **Access rights**
  - If the (meta)data for the research project is shared online, you need to state the access rights to the data 
- **Identifier**
  - If information about the research project and/or its data is available online, you should provide a DOI or PID to the online location

If you are depositing your data in a repository or catalogue, it is important to check the metadata requirements of those sites to ensure to capture any further metadata elements.

</details>

---

## Dataset metadata
 
Like the project metadata, dataset metadata provides the what, when, why, where and how of a particular dataset. For larger research projects, you may produce multiple datasets. These datasets could be have a more specific focus within the research project or be carried out in a specific location or by a particular researcher. As such, the metadata for the dataset may vary from the project metadata.

**What metadata elements that we captured at the project level that we would also want to capture at the dataset level?**
<p></p>
<details>
<summary>Repeated metadata elements to capture for datasets</summary>
<p></p>

- **Title**
  - the title of the dataset
- **Creator**
  - the creator of the particular dataset
- **Subject**
  - e.g. keywords or topics
- **Description**
  - e.g. a description of the dataset and what it includes
- **Contributor**
  - e.g. people or organisations who contributed to the research process
- **Date**
  - e.g. the date range of when the data for that dataset was collected
- **Type**
- **Format**
  - the format that the dataset is stored in
- **Language**
  - the language the dataset is stored in
- **Relation**
  - any other publications or resources that are related to that dataset
- **Coverage**
  - the geographical coverage of the dataset
-**Access rights**
  - the access rights of the individual dataset 

</details>
<p></p>

\----

<p></p>

**What additional metadata elements should we collect for a dataset?**

<details>
<summary>New metadata elements to capture for datasets</summary>
<p></p>

-**Project**
  - the project that produced the dataset

- **Case quantity**
  - how many cases are included in the file

- **Variables**
  - how many variables are included in the file

- **Last Updated**
  - when the dataset was last updated

</details>

>[!NOTE]
>Would the last couple around variables classify as variable metadata rather than dataset metadata?
