foundation/2.1 Unit type, Population and Universe.md, before:

---
title: Unit 2.1 Unit type, Population and Universe
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed, Hayley Mills
date: April 29, 2025 - Updated February 2026
---

# Unit 2.1 Unit type, Population and Universe

!!! example ""

    **Unit study time**
    2 hours

    **Intended Learning Outcome**
    By the end of the unit, you will ...

----
As demonstrated in unit 1.2, we need to describe what/who the data is about. We can do this by capturing Unit Type, Universe and Population metadata. We briefly defined unit type and universe previously, we will now have a more detailed look at these, as well as what population metadata is and how they relate to each other. 

The reason for being explicit about these terms is that they provide a way to understand 
- Who or what is being measured
- The characteristic of whom or what is being measured
- Where and when is was being measured

This can seem self evident but if we want to validly combine or compare data (or at least know we are NOT comparing the same thing) these are important peices of metadata whihc allow us to make valid or informed decisions.

### Unit type

The Unit Type is the unit of observation or analysis in your research based on a single characteristic. It is usually a primary entity, for example: individual, household, establishment, country, dog, apple, maize plant.

The Universe and Population help contextualise the Unit Type further.

### Universe

"A universe consists of all survey elements that qualify for inclusion in the research study. The precise definition of the universe for a particular study is set by the research question, which specifies who or what is of interest." Encyclopedia of Survey Research Methods (https://methods.sagepub.com/ency/edvol/encyclopedia-of-survey-research-methods/chpt/universe).

A universe is broad in nature as it is the set all experimental units, from which a sample is to be drawn. Although they can vary in size e.g. a survey of individuals who have won 1 million dollars or more in the lottery is a much smaller universe then a survey of the television-viewing habits of all adults in the United States Encyclopedia of Survey Research Methods (https://methods.sagepub.com/ency/edvol/encyclopedia-of-survey-research-

Understanding the universe can help us understand if the data can be used for our research question or not. For example if your research question was concerned with wind speeds in urban areas a study with a universe "All wind direction measurements recorded by research vessels" would not be able to help with your reserach. It could help with instrument bias across research vessels for example. 

A Universe contextualises a Unit Type by providing additional characteristics, defining a certain group of people, objects, institutions or events. 

For example...
- All individuals with a university degree
- All adults who could develop hypertension
- All retail business establishments
- All maize plants grown under drought stress

In this way, the Universe is the larger group that the study's conclusions might apply to. 

>[!NOTE]
> BO - I feel like the universise is the smaller group as you're narrowing down which kinds of people i.e. not just ALL individuals, just those who work for tech companies. What do you think? 

A Universe may also be defined by what it excludes...<br>
- All retail business establishments except charity shops
- All dogs without an owner

### Population
The Population contextualises the Universe by specifying the experimental context, location, and timeframe. The Population is the specific subset of the Universe representing the actual group from which data could be collected. The Population is operational and has a practically defined set of elements that are accessible, identifiable, and eligible for sampling.

For example: 
- All individuals with a university degree living in Edinburgh in 1990
- All adults who could develop hypertension attending primary care clinics in Manchester in 2024
- All retail business establishments perating in London as of March 2025.
- All maize plants grown under drought stress in Kenya during the 2024 growing season.


**Example dataset**

| name | label          | Unit Type                 |  Population                                    |Universe                      |
|------|----------------|---------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------|
| f_n  | first name     | Individual                | Adults aged 18-50 living in the UK as of 2016  | Adults aged 18-50
| s    | sex            | Individual                | Adults aged 18-50 living in the UK as of 2016  | Adults aged 18-50
| h    | height         | Individual                | Adults aged 18-50 living in the UK as of 2016  | Adults aged 18-50
| b_d  | birthdate      | Individual                | Adults aged 18-50 living in the UK as of 2016  | Adults aged 18-50
| m_s  | martial status | Individual                | Adults aged 18-50 living in the UK as of 2016  | Adults aged 18-50

As these variables are from a single data collection point, the Unit Type, Population and Universe will be the same. If your whole dataset only collects data from a single source, then it may be more efficient to capture the Unit Type, Population and Universe metadata at the dataset level so you don't have to repeat it in your variable metadata.

However, if your dataset compiled data from different sources and/or on different levels, you would need to specify the different Unit Type, Population and Universe for each variable.

For example, let's look at this example dataset collecting data on crop health. 

The data was collected in 2024 in England.
>[!NOTE]
>HM is this a real dataset?

| Sample ID | Crop   | Date Collected | Field ID | NDVI Score | Disease Present | Farm ID | Farm Size (ha) | Region    | Avg. Rainfall (mm) | Avg. Temp (°C) |
| --------- | ------ | -------------- | ---------| ----------- | -------------- | --------|-------------|---------------| -------------------| -------------- 
| S001      | Wheat  | 2025-06-12     | F-EM01   | 0.78        | No             | Farm01  | 120         | East midlands | 55.2               | 19.1           |
| S002      | Barley | 2025-06-13     | F-NE07   | 0.65        | Yes            | Farm02  | 95          | North east    | 67.4               | 17.8           |
| S003      | Corn   | 2025-06-14     | F-SE03   | 0.82        | No             | Farm03  | 180         | South west    | 48.6               | 22.3           |
| S004      | Wheat  | 2025-06-15     | F-WM04   | 0.73        | No             | Farm01  | 120         | West midlands | 55.2               | 19.1           |

What are the different Unit Type, Universe and Population in this dataset?

<details>
<summary>Click here to find out...</summary>
<p></p>

| Label   | Unit type   | Universe  | Population | 
| ------------- | ----------- | --------- | ---------- 
| Sample ID     | Crop |All wheat, corn, and barley crops | Wheat, corn, and barley crops in England during the 2025 growing season
| Crop          | Crop |All wheat, corn, and barley crops  | Wheat, corn, and barley crops in England during the 2025 growing season
| Date collected  | Crop |All wheat, corn, and barley crops  | Wheat, corn, and barley crops in England during the 2025 growing season
| Field ID        | Field       | All wheat, corn and barley fields | Fields in England growing wheat, corn or barley in 2025
| NVDI score      | Crop |All wheat, corn, and barley crops  | Wheat, corn, and barley crops in England during the 2025 growing season
| Disease present | Crop |All wheat, corn, and barley crops  | Wheat, corn, and barley crops in England during the 2025 growing season
| Farm ID         | Farm       | All farms growing wheat, corn or barley | Farms growing wheat, corn or barleys in England in 2025
| Farm size (ha)  | Farm       |All farms growing wheat, corn or barley | Farms growing wheat, corn or barleys in England in 2025
| Region          | Region     |All regions containing farms growing wheat, corn or barley | Regions in England that contain farms growing wheat, corn or barley in 2025
| Avg. Rainfall (mm) | Region  |All regions containing farms growing wheat, corn or barley| Regions in England that contain farms growing wheat, corn or barley in 2025
| Avg. Temp (°C)  |Region      |All regions containing farms growing wheat, corn or barley| Regions in England that contain farms growing wheat, corn or barley in 2025

</details>

It is usually not possible for a study to sample the whole population, so a sample framework is estabished and a subset is actually observed. So in the example above, only a selected number of crops will be sampled on a select number of farms, likley in a select number of regions. The research question will determine the sampling framework taking into account the scale and resources of the project. 


### What are the benefits of including Unit Type, Universe and Population metadata?

First, it gives us a clear picture of what/who the data is about and what the unit of analysis is.

Moreover, as Unit Type and Universe are not defined by time or geography, you open up the possibility of that varaiable being compared with other similar variables from different datasets conducted at a different time and/or place. This encourages cross-study comparison, fuelling the potential for new research investigations from existing data.

The population defines the scope and representativeness of your data, and so is critical for understanding any sampling bias and for statistical inference. You cannot aswer the quesiton 'Does your sample reflect the characteristics of the population?' if you don't know the population. Population is the benchmark against which representativeness is judged. In addtion, you cannot detect sampling bias, unless the population is known. Any bias can only be evaluated by comparing sample vs population. In addition, when making inferences, you need to know the boundaries of the population so you can ask questions about that population and not beyond it. In the example above, you would not be able to generalise the data to infer crops in Wales.  

### Summary 
<img src="img/Universe_population_unit_type_sample_diagram.png" alt="Alt Text" width="425" height="900"> 

- Unit Type: The entity observed (e.g. plant, soil sample, individual).
- Universe: Is conceptual. It is the conceptual total—everything that fits the definition, whether or not it can be fully identified or listed.(e.g. maize plants under drought stress, individual with degree). 
- Population: Is operational. It practically defines a set of elements from the universe that are accessible, identifiable, and eligible for sampling. It Adds time and geography and sometimes exeperimental context (e.g. maize plants sampled in Kenya in 2024).
- Sample: The actual subset collected within that population, based on the sampling framework. It is a collection of units (e.g. Plant ID 014 in Field A, Plant ID 015 in Field A and Plant ID 016 in Field A etc.) 
- Unit: The actuall individual entity in the dataset. The smallest element you observe (e.g. Plant ID 014 in Field A or Jane Smith). These could commonly be cases in a survey study. 

<img src="img/Universe_population_unit_type_sample_diagram_dditwg.png" alt="Alt Text" width="1425" height="1900"> 
DDI Training Group. (2024, February 14). Foundational DDI Metadata: Unit, Unit Type, Universe, and Population. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10659410

### Exercise 

>[!NOTE]
>HM - not sure what this exercise is?

#### Measuring Income at the same time and geography

| Type        | Example 1                      | Example 2                         | Example 3                                   |
|-------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| Unit Type   | Individual | Household | Business |
| Population  | All persons in England in 2021 | All households in England in 2021 | All registered businesses in England in 2021 |
| Universe    | Income of > £1 million per year | Income of > £1 million per year | Income of > £1 million per year |

#### Measuring Income at a different time 

| Type        | Example 1                      | Example 2                         | 
|-------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Unit Type   | Individual | Individual |
| Population  | All persons in England in 2021  | All persons in England in 2011 |
| Universe    | Income of > £1 million per year | Income of > £1 million per year |

#### Measuring Income at a different geographical area

| Type        | Example 1                      | Example 2                         | 
|-------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Unit Type   | Individual | Individual |
| Population  | All persons in England in 2021  | All persons in Wales in 2021 |
| Universe    | Income of > £1 million per year | Income of > £1 million per year |

#### Measuring Income for different universes

| Type        | Example 1                      | Example 2                         | 
|-------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Unit Type   | Individual | Individual |
| Population  | All persons in England in 2021  | All persons in England in 2021 |
| Universe    | Over 67 years of age | 16-67 years of age |

>[!NOTE]
>SW This section confuses me a bit - are 'unit type' and 'universe' widely used terms in metadata? If we are planning to keep these terms in, I think a simple graphic of how they all fit together (unit type, population and universe), to accompany the text, would be really useful here. As I was reading through this, I found myself thinking that, as a researcher, I would generally describe lot of these things as psrt of the 'population'. <br>
> KR When discussing with JJ, unit type/population/universe are key metadata concepts to explain. That's useful to know - I will try and create a infographic that describes their relationship to each other.

>[!NOTE]
> JJ the above example doesnt really make sense in a single data collection, so I would remove <br>
> KR Does the additional example make it more clear? // is it correct? <br>
> KR I have moved the Understanding Society example to the Question Metadata unit (2.3), though can add here instead?

>[!NOTE]
>KR referencing DDI unit type, population and universe definitions from DDI

Commit message:

Comments on using datasets within this section / pedagogy

foundation/2.1 Unit type, Population and Universe.md, after:

---
title: Unit 2.1 Unit type, Population and Universe
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed, Hayley Mills
date: April 29, 2025 - Updated February 2026
---

# Unit 2.1 Unit type, Population and Universe

!!! example ""

    **Unit study time**
    2 hours

    **Intended Learning Outcome**
    By the end of the unit, you will ...

----
As demonstrated in unit 1.2, we need to describe what/who the data is about. We can do this by capturing Unit Type, Universe and Population metadata. We briefly defined unit type and universe previously, we will now have a more detailed look at these, as well as what population metadata is and how they relate to each other. 

The reason for being explicit about these terms is that they provide a way to understand 
- Who or what is being measured
- The characteristic of whom or what is being measured
- Where and when is was being measured

This can seem self evident but if we want to validly combine or compare data (or at least know we are NOT comparing the same thing) these are important peices of metadata whihc allow us to make valid or informed decisions.

### Unit type

The Unit Type is the unit of observation or analysis in your research based on a single characteristic. It is usually a primary entity, for example: individual, household, establishment, country, dog, apple, maize plant.

The Universe and Population help contextualise the Unit Type further.

### Universe

"A universe consists of all survey elements that qualify for inclusion in the research study. The precise definition of the universe for a particular study is set by the research question, which specifies who or what is of interest." Encyclopedia of Survey Research Methods (https://methods.sagepub.com/ency/edvol/encyclopedia-of-survey-research-methods/chpt/universe).

A universe is broad in nature as it is the set all experimental units, from which a sample is to be drawn. Although they can vary in size e.g. a survey of individuals who have won 1 million dollars or more in the lottery is a much smaller universe then a survey of the television-viewing habits of all adults in the United States Encyclopedia of Survey Research Methods (https://methods.sagepub.com/ency/edvol/encyclopedia-of-survey-research-

Understanding the universe can help us understand if the data can be used for our research question or not. For example if your research question was concerned with wind speeds in urban areas a study with a universe "All wind direction measurements recorded by research vessels" would not be able to help with your reserach. It could help with instrument bias across research vessels for example. 

A Universe contextualises a Unit Type by providing additional characteristics, defining a certain group of people, objects, institutions or events. 

For example...
- All individuals with a university degree
- All adults who could develop hypertension
- All retail business establishments
- All maize plants grown under drought stress

In this way, the Universe is the larger group that the study's conclusions might apply to. 

>[!NOTE]
> BO - I feel like the universise is the smaller group as you're narrowing down which kinds of people i.e. not just ALL individuals, just those who work for tech companies. What do you think? 

A Universe may also be defined by what it excludes...<br>
- All retail business establishments except charity shops
- All dogs without an owner

### Population
The Population contextualises the Universe by specifying the experimental context, location, and timeframe. The Population is the specific subset of the Universe representing the actual group from which data could be collected. The Population is operational and has a practically defined set of elements that are accessible, identifiable, and eligible for sampling.

For example: 
- All individuals with a university degree living in Edinburgh in 1990
- All adults who could develop hypertension attending primary care clinics in Manchester in 2024
- All retail business establishments perating in London as of March 2025.
- All maize plants grown under drought stress in Kenya during the 2024 growing season.


**Example dataset**

| name | label          | Unit Type                 |  Population                                    |Universe                      |
|------|----------------|---------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------|
| f_n  | first name     | Individual                | Adults aged 18-50 living in the UK as of 2016  | Adults aged 18-50
| s    | sex            | Individual                | Adults aged 18-50 living in the UK as of 2016  | Adults aged 18-50
| h    | height         | Individual                | Adults aged 18-50 living in the UK as of 2016  | Adults aged 18-50
| b_d  | birthdate      | Individual                | Adults aged 18-50 living in the UK as of 2016  | Adults aged 18-50
| m_s  | martial status | Individual                | Adults aged 18-50 living in the UK as of 2016  | Adults aged 18-50

As these variables are from a single data collection point, the Unit Type, Population and Universe will be the same. If your whole dataset only collects data from a single source, then it may be more efficient to capture the Unit Type, Population and Universe metadata at the dataset level so you don't have to repeat it in your variable metadata.

However, if your dataset compiled data from different sources and/or on different levels, you would need to specify the different Unit Type, Population and Universe for each variable.

For example, let's look at this example dataset collecting data on crop health. 

The data was collected in 2024 in England.
>[!NOTE]
>HM is this a real dataset?
>JJ I don't think it is helpful to think about this section using a dataset, its a data collection "concept" - IMHO, we should remove this and jump straight into "worked examples"

| Sample ID | Crop   | Date Collected | Field ID | NDVI Score | Disease Present | Farm ID | Farm Size (ha) | Region    | Avg. Rainfall (mm) | Avg. Temp (°C) |
| --------- | ------ | -------------- | ---------| ----------- | -------------- | --------|-------------|---------------| -------------------| -------------- 
| S001      | Wheat  | 2025-06-12     | F-EM01   | 0.78        | No             | Farm01  | 120         | East midlands | 55.2               | 19.1           |
| S002      | Barley | 2025-06-13     | F-NE07   | 0.65        | Yes            | Farm02  | 95          | North east    | 67.4               | 17.8           |
| S003      | Corn   | 2025-06-14     | F-SE03   | 0.82        | No             | Farm03  | 180         | South west    | 48.6               | 22.3           |
| S004      | Wheat  | 2025-06-15     | F-WM04   | 0.73        | No             | Farm01  | 120         | West midlands | 55.2               | 19.1           |

What are the different Unit Type, Universe and Population in this dataset?


<details>
<summary>Click here to find out...</summary>
<p></p>

| Label   | Unit type   | Universe  | Population | 
| ------------- | ----------- | --------- | ---------- 
| Sample ID     | Crop |All wheat, corn, and barley crops | Wheat, corn, and barley crops in England during the 2025 growing season
| Crop          | Crop |All wheat, corn, and barley crops  | Wheat, corn, and barley crops in England during the 2025 growing season
| Date collected  | Crop |All wheat, corn, and barley crops  | Wheat, corn, and barley crops in England during the 2025 growing season
| Field ID        | Field       | All wheat, corn and barley fields | Fields in England growing wheat, corn or barley in 2025
| NVDI score      | Crop |All wheat, corn, and barley crops  | Wheat, corn, and barley crops in England during the 2025 growing season
| Disease present | Crop |All wheat, corn, and barley crops  | Wheat, corn, and barley crops in England during the 2025 growing season
| Farm ID         | Farm       | All farms growing wheat, corn or barley | Farms growing wheat, corn or barleys in England in 2025
| Farm size (ha)  | Farm       |All farms growing wheat, corn or barley | Farms growing wheat, corn or barleys in England in 2025
| Region          | Region     |All regions containing farms growing wheat, corn or barley | Regions in England that contain farms growing wheat, corn or barley in 2025
| Avg. Rainfall (mm) | Region  |All regions containing farms growing wheat, corn or barley| Regions in England that contain farms growing wheat, corn or barley in 2025
| Avg. Temp (°C)  |Region      |All regions containing farms growing wheat, corn or barley| Regions in England that contain farms growing wheat, corn or barley in 2025

</details>

It is usually not possible for a study to sample the whole population, so a sample framework is estabished and a subset is actually observed. So in the example above, only a selected number of crops will be sampled on a select number of farms, likley in a select number of regions. The research question will determine the sampling framework taking into account the scale and resources of the project. 


### What are the benefits of including Unit Type, Universe and Population metadata?

First, it gives us a clear picture of what/who the data is about and what the unit of analysis is.

Moreover, as Unit Type and Universe are not defined by time or geography, you open up the possibility of that varaiable being compared with other similar variables from different datasets conducted at a different time and/or place. This encourages cross-study comparison, fuelling the potential for new research investigations from existing data.

The population defines the scope and representativeness of your data, and so is critical for understanding any sampling bias and for statistical inference. You cannot aswer the quesiton 'Does your sample reflect the characteristics of the population?' if you don't know the population. Population is the benchmark against which representativeness is judged. In addtion, you cannot detect sampling bias, unless the population is known. Any bias can only be evaluated by comparing sample vs population. In addition, when making inferences, you need to know the boundaries of the population so you can ask questions about that population and not beyond it. In the example above, you would not be able to generalise the data to infer crops in Wales.  

### Summary 
<img src="img/Universe_population_unit_type_sample_diagram.png" alt="Alt Text" width="425" height="900"> 

- Unit Type: The entity observed (e.g. plant, soil sample, individual).
- Universe: Is conceptual. It is the conceptual total—everything that fits the definition, whether or not it can be fully identified or listed.(e.g. maize plants under drought stress, individual with degree). 
- Population: Is operational. It practically defines a set of elements from the universe that are accessible, identifiable, and eligible for sampling. It Adds time and geography and sometimes exeperimental context (e.g. maize plants sampled in Kenya in 2024).
- Sample: The actual subset collected within that population, based on the sampling framework. It is a collection of units (e.g. Plant ID 014 in Field A, Plant ID 015 in Field A and Plant ID 016 in Field A etc.) 
- Unit: The actuall individual entity in the dataset. The smallest element you observe (e.g. Plant ID 014 in Field A or Jane Smith). These could commonly be cases in a survey study. 

<img src="img/Universe_population_unit_type_sample_diagram_dditwg.png" alt="Alt Text" width="1425" height="1900"> 
DDI Training Group. (2024, February 14). Foundational DDI Metadata: Unit, Unit Type, Universe, and Population. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10659410

### Worked Examples? 

>[!NOTE]
>HM - not sure what this exercise is
>JJ - I think unverse etc makes more sense as comparison **between** datasets perhaps it is a worked example of that, rather than an exercise

#### Measuring Income at the same time and geography

| Type        | Example 1                      | Example 2                         | Example 3                                   |
|-------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| Unit Type   | Individual | Household | Business |
| Population  | All persons in England in 2021 | All households in England in 2021 | All registered businesses in England in 2021 |
| Universe    | Income of > £1 million per year | Income of > £1 million per year | Income of > £1 million per year |

#### Measuring Income at a different time 

| Type        | Example 1                      | Example 2                         | 
|-------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Unit Type   | Individual | Individual |
| Population  | All persons in England in 2021  | All persons in England in 2011 |
| Universe    | Income of > £1 million per year | Income of > £1 million per year |

#### Measuring Income at a different geographical area

| Type        | Example 1                      | Example 2                         | 
|-------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Unit Type   | Individual | Individual |
| Population  | All persons in England in 2021  | All persons in Wales in 2021 |
| Universe    | Income of > £1 million per year | Income of > £1 million per year |

#### Measuring Income for different universes

| Type        | Example 1                      | Example 2                         | 
|-------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Unit Type   | Individual | Individual |
| Population  | All persons in England in 2021  | All persons in England in 2021 |
| Universe    | Over 67 years of age | 16-67 years of age |

>[!NOTE]
>SW This section confuses me a bit - are 'unit type' and 'universe' widely used terms in metadata? If we are planning to keep these terms in, I think a simple graphic of how they all fit together (unit type, population and universe), to accompany the text, would be really useful here. As I was reading through this, I found myself thinking that, as a researcher, I would generally describe lot of these things as psrt of the 'population'. <br>
> KR When discussing with JJ, unit type/population/universe are key metadata concepts to explain. That's useful to know - I will try and create a infographic that describes their relationship to each other.

>[!NOTE]
> JJ the above example doesnt really make sense in a single data collection, so I would remove <br>
> KR Does the additional example make it more clear? // is it correct? <br>
> KR I have moved the Understanding Society example to the Question Metadata unit (2.3), though can add here instead?

>[!NOTE]
>KR referencing DDI unit type, population and universe definitions from DDI
