---
title: Unit 2.2 Dataset metadata
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed
date: April 29, 2025
---

# Unit 2.2 Dataset metadata

## Overview

### Unit study time
1 hour

### Intended Learning Outcome
By the end of the unit, you will ...

### Outline

---

## What is dataset metadata?
 
Like the study level metadata we explored in the previous unit, dataset metadata provides the who, what, when, why, where and how of a particular dataset. For larger research projects, you may produce multiple datasets. These datasets could have different areas of interest or be carried out in different locations or by a certain researcher. As such, the metadata for each dataset can vary. It will also offer more specific information than the overall project metadata, as it relates to a singular dataset within a research project.

However, we often use the same metadata elements used to capture information about the overall study and apply them at the dataset level.

**What metadata elements that we captured at the study level that we would also want to capture at the dataset level?**
<p></p>
<details>
<summary>Repeated metadata elements to capture for datasets</summary>
<p></p>

- **Title**
  - the title of the dataset
- **Creator**
  - the creator of the particular dataset
- **Subject**
  - e.g. keywords or topics
- **Description**
  - e.g. a description of the dataset and what it includes
- **Contributor**
  - e.g. people or organisations who contributed to the research process
- **Date**
  - e.g. the date range of when the data for that dataset was collected
- **Type**
- **Format**
  - the format that the dataset is stored in
- **Language**
  - the language the dataset is stored in
- **Relation**
  - any other publications or resources that are related to that dataset
- **Coverage**
  - the geographical coverage of the dataset
-**Access rights**
  - the access rights of the individual dataset 

</details>
<p></p>

\----

We can also capture additional metadata elements that we didn't cover in the study metadata to give further information about a dataset.

<p></p>

**What additional metadata elements should we collect for a dataset?**

<details>
<summary>New metadata elements to capture for datasets</summary>
<p></p>

- **Study**
  - The study that produced the dataset
- **Case quantity**
  - The case quantity refers to number of instances of data were recorded
- **Variables**
  - How many variables are included in the file
- **Last Updated**
  - When the dataset was last updated

</details>

>[!NOTE]
>Would the last couple around variables classify as variable metadata rather than dataset metadata? <br>
> BO - I think they fit fine here

>[!NOTE]
> BO - will it be obvious to people what "cases" are? <br>
>KR have added a explanatory note about cases
