---
title: Unit 2.2 Variable metadata
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed
date: April 29, 2025
---

## Metadata for tabular data 

Now we have looked at catalogue and dataset metadata, let's take a look at metadata for the data itself (also referred to as low level metadata). This metadata describes what type of data is included in a dataset. We will look at creating metadata for quantitative, tabular data.

In tabular data, data is stored in columns and rows. In this unit, we will look at how to create metadata about **variables**. First, we need to be able to identify what a variable is. 

Take a look at the tabular dataset. What are the variables in this dataset?

| f_n  | h   | b_d        | s    | m_s  | 
|------|-----|------------|------|------|
| John | 178 | 1998-09-02 | 1    | 3
| Gillian | 200 | 1979-06-12 | 2    | 2
| Alice| 182 | 1986-12-24 | 2    | 1
| Frederick | 168 | 2001-05-16 | 3    | 2
| Laura| 156 | 2011-03-05 | 2    | 1

<details>
<summary><b>The variables are...</b></summary>
<p></p>

- f_n
- h
- b_d
- m_s

Simply put, variables are the header of the columns in tabular data.

</details>

>[!NOTE]
>KR Already noted that we will work on tabular data in the first unit, do you think it's required again here?

---

## Defining variables

We use the term variable all the time, but what is it's definition?

>Variable is a characteristic of a unit being observed. A variable might be the answer of a question, have an administrative source, or be derived from other variables.[^1]

Examples of a variable could be ...
- Height
- Weight
- Age

In research, you collect data about this variable, called variable data. This is what makes up our datasets. For example ...
- Height: 1.73m, 1.45m, 1.67m
- Weight: 57kg, 69kg, 71kg
- Age: 29 years, 37 years, 64 years

You can collect variable data direct from research activity e.g. measuring someone with a tape measure, weighing someone with scales, asking someone to state their age in a survey. You can also derive data from other variable data. For example, you can calculate someone's BMI from the variable data collected for height, weight and age. This would make BMI a **derived variable**, as it is calculated through other variables.

>[!NOTE]
>>Note: CoData doesn't include definition for variable - will be in new terminology bank

[^1]: Definition: https://rdf-vocabulary.ddialliance.org/discovery.html#variable-and-variable-definition<br>
UK Data Service: definition of a variable - A variable is an attribute that describes a person, place, thing, or idea. The value of the variable can "vary" from one entity to another.<br>


---

## Why create variable metadata?

If you were presented with the example dataset at the beginning of this unit, would you have the information required to understand the dataset?

Or if you didn't have access to the dataset but you did receive the following information...

>The dataset contains the variables:
>- f_n
>- h
>- b_d
>- m_s

Would you have enough information to be able to assess whether the dataset is of interest to you before you pay to access it?
<p></p>
Similarly, imagine this is a dataset you created 10 years ago and you're returning to see if it contains useful data for a new project. Would you remember what the variabels f_n; h; b_d; m_s mean?
<p></p>
What information would you need in order to be able to understand the example dataset and its variables?
<p></p>
<details>
<summary><b> Variable metadata</b></summary>
<p></p>

In order to understand the variables, you will probably need information for the following questions...

- What do the abbreviations mean?
- What type of data did you collect for the variable?
- How was the variable measured?
- How was the variable data collected?
- What was the unit of study?
- How much data was collected for each data?
- What are the valid inputs for the variable data?

Variable metadata provides the information to answer these questions. 

</details>

\------

If we didn't have information about the variables, we would have to undertake time consuming processes decode what variables mean and what type of data they collected. If it is our own data, this may include working back through legacy files to remember how the research was conducted. If it is other people's data or an external person is trying to understand our datasets, they would have to contact the data creator in order to clarify what the variables mean and the type of data. If information about the variables isn't abailable, the dataset is less trustworth and as such, would less likely ne re-used.

What are the benefits of variable metadata?

<details>
<summary><b> Benefits of variable metadata</b></summary>
<p></p>

**Personal benefit**
By having a clear record of what variable abbreviations mean and the type of data collected, metadata allows you to manage your data during the research process. It also helps for your future self when you return to your data, allowing you to quickly understand a dataset and potentially re-use it. 

**Re-usability of data**
With variable metadata, people get a broader and more comprehensive picture of what data exists in a dataset. So even if a variable is not a focal point of the original research project or publication, another person may find this variable and re-use the variable data in their secondary research. Moreover, by knowing what variables a research project contains, researchers may be able to cross-study comparisons that they did not know would be possible if they were only working from catalogue and dataset metadata.

If you're sharing your (meta)data, variable metadata can also help the **discoverability of data**
Variable metadata is sometimes used by data catalogues as part of their search and filter functions. For example ...
- [UK Data Service variable search tool](https://discover.ukdataservice.ac.uk/variables)
- [ICSPR](https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/web/pages/ICPSR/ssvd/)
- [CLOSER variable search tool](https://discovery.closer.ac.uk/search/variables)

They also provide information about the variables directly on these sites, allowning people to interact with variable metadata in a straightforward way.

</details>

---

## What metadata should you create?

Thinking back to the type of information we would need to understand the example dataset, what metadata elements could we capture to provide information about the variables?

**What do the abbreviations mean?**
<details>
<summary>Metadata elements</summary>
<p></p>
  
  - Variable name (R)
  - Variable label (R)
  - Variable description (O)
    
</details>

\------

<p></p>

**What type of data did you collect for the variable?**
<details>
<summary>Metadata elements</summary>
<p></p>
  
  - Value representation (R)
  - Data type (R)
  - Valid input (R)
    
</details>

\------

<p></p>

**How was the variable measured?**
<details>
<summary>Metadata elements</summary>
<p></p>
  
  - Unit of measurement (O)
  - Derived Y/N (O)
  - Data provenance (R)
  - Measurement provenance (R)
  - Source reference (O)
    
</details>

\------

<p></p>  

**What was the unit of study?**
<details>
<summary>Metadata elements</summary>
<p></p>
  
  - Unit type (R)
  - Population (R)
  - Universe (R)
    
</details>

\------

<p></p>

**How much data was collected for each data?**
<details>
<summary>Metadata elements</summary>
<p></p>
  
  - Number of cases (R)
  - Missing value code (O)
  - Valid responses (R)
  - Invalid responses (R)
    
</details>

\------

<p></p>


In the rest of this unit, we shall go through these metadata elements and look at what information to capture for each. The elements marked with (R) should be considered required metadata that all projects complete. The elements marked with (O) are optional metadata that can be completed if relevant and necessary.

As we go through each metadata element, you can practice capturing variable metadata in the Variable Metadata tab of the Metadata Template excel. You can use your own dataset or an example teaching dataset to do this (see unit 1.1 for a list of open access teaching datasets available). 

---

## Variable name, label and description

First of all, you need to describe and define the variable itself. In order to do this, we will start with the metadata elements...
- Value representation (R)
- Data type (R)
- Valid input (R)

**Variable name**<br>
This is the term used for the variable in your dataset e.g. f_n, h, b_d, m_s

**Variable label**<br>
A short, clear label describing the variable, explaining any abbreviations in the variable name e.g. f_n = first name

**Variable description**<br>
A longer explanation of what the variable measures. Sometimes this includes information about conditions of the data collected (e.g. first name, **no nicknames**'), how the variable was collected (e.g. '**self-reported** biological sex') and what measurement was used (e.g. 'height calculated to **nearest cm**'). Add enough detail so that someone new to your research can understand the variable.

For our example dataset above, we could create this variable metadata.

| Name | Label          | Description          |
|------|----------------|----------------------|
| f_n  | first name     | Full legal first name, no nicknames
| s    | sex            | Self-reported biological sex
| h    | height         | Height calculated to nearest cm
| b_d  | birthdate      | Date of birth yyyy/mm/dd
| m_s  | martial status | Self-reported marital status


---

## Value representation and data type

Next, you need to describe the type of data collected for the variable.

**Value representation**<br>
Value representation describes the structure and the content of the variable data for example, text, numeric, date, code, scale, geographic, image, symbol
- Height: numeric (e.g. 156cm)
- First name: text (e.g. 'Laura')
- Date of birth: date (e.g. '2011-03-05')
- Martial status: code (e.g. 's')

**Data type**<br>
Data type provides further information about this variable data. 

For example, we've already described variable 'height' is numeric in the value representation. However, what else could we specify about the numeric data?<br>
- It will only contain **positive** numbers as you can't have a minus number for height
- In this dataset, the height variable data only contains **whole numbers**, not decimals
- In which case, we can call describe the data type to be **positive integer**. However, if the data did contain decimal points, for example 178.5cm we may describe the data type for height as float.
<p></p>
For 'date', the data is written in [ISO 8601 format](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html#:~:text=Therefore%2C%20the%20order%20of%20the,27%2018%3A00%3A00.000). so can use the data type column to specify this.
<p></p>
For the variables 'sex' and 'marital status' the code list is expressed as numbers in the dataset. So we could use the data type column to specify that it the code is expressed numerically. Alternatively, if the codes were expressed as 'm', 'fe', 'othr', 'ns' (rather than 1, 2, 3, 4), we could put text in the data type as the codes are written out.
<p></p>

| Name | Label          | Description                         | Value representation | Data type   |
|------|----------------|-------------------------------------|----------------------|-------------|
| f_n  | first name     | Full legal first name, no nicknames | text                 | string
| s    | sex            | Self-reported biological sex        | codelist            | numeric                        
| h    | height         | Height calculated to nearest cm     | numeric              | postive integer                       
| b_d  | birthdate      | Date of birth yyyy/mm/dd            | date                 | [ISO 8601](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html#:~:text=Therefore%2C%20the%20order%20of%20the,27%2018%3A00%3A00.000.)                          
| m_s  | martial status | Self-reported marital status        | codelist            | numeric                          


>[!NOTE]
> KR Please could you let me know whether the data type seems correct here or if you would describe them in a different way. Thanks. <br>
> Question on value representation: for codelist data, would the value representation be numeric if the codes are stored as numbers (e.g. 1=single, 2=married, 3=divorced etc.) or is it up to the individual who is creating the metadata to decide what they use that metadata field? Should you we give a list of allowed values or should we give guidance that as long as your consistent in your metadata creation (create controlled vocabulary of your own in excel using a drop down list), then it doesn't matter if the values you use for a certain metadata field differs to what we have written in this course.
>

---

## Unit of measurement, valid range and missing values

Once you have described the variable as it appears in the dataset, it's important to include extra contextual information so you can interpret the data further. For example, for height, we know the  data is numeric. However, if we didn't have the variable description, we wouldn't know if these numbers indicate metres, centimeters or millimeters. We need information around the unit of measurement and what the acceptable valid range is for the variable.

**Unit of measurement**<br>
The unit of measurement is simply the unit used to express the quantity or magnitude of the object you're measuring. 
For the example dataset...
- The unit of measurement for the variable **height in this example is centimetres**. However, unit of measurement will not be applicable to some variables such as first name or marital status. In these cases, you can put N/A.

In order for research data to be suitable for analysis, it is best practice to use _one_ unit of measurement per concept. For example, the variable data for height shouldn't be recorded as 1m 78cm as this would mix two units of measurement, metre and centimetres. So even it the data was collected in this way, we should translate the data of height in one measurement unit, e.g. 1.78m _or_ 178 cm, keeping the one-to-one relationship between concept (height) and measure (m _or_ cm).

**Valid range**<br>
Valid range outlines the allowed values for this metadata element. 
For the example dataset ... 
- For height, you may want to set permitted values to be between 55 - 220 (depending on the population you are collecting data from).
- If the example dataset only collected data from living adults, you could set a valid range for birthdate as 1910-2007.
- For text, you may want to specify how many characters are permitted and set a valid range of 1-50 characters.
- For variables using codelists, sex and marital status, you could include a reference to the codelist you are using so people can reference the permissable codes and their meanings (we will look more indepth into codelist metadata in unit 2.4)


| name | label          |  Value representation | Data type       | Unit of measurement | Valid range   |
|------|----------------|-----------------------|-----------------|---------------------|---------------|
| f_n  | first name     | text                  | string          | N/A                 | 1-50 characters      
| s    | sex            | code list             | numeric         | N/A                 | CLsx_01                           
| h    | height         | numeric               | postive integer | cm                  | 55 - 220                       
| b_d  | birthdate      | date                  | [ISO 8601](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html#:~:text=Therefore%2C%20the%20order%20of%20the,27%2018%3A00%3A00.000.)  | N/A                 | 1910/01/01-2007/01/01                          
| m_s  | martial status | code list             | numeric         | N/A                 | CLms_01                                         


---

## Unit type, Population and Universe

Now we've described the variable and type of data it contains, we need to describe what/who the data is about. We do this by capturing Unit Type, Universe and Population metadata.

**Unit type**<br>
The Unit Type is the unit of observation or analysis in your research based on a single characteristic with no specification of time and geography. It is usually a primary entity, for example: individual, household, establishment, country, dog, apple

For the example dataset, we are collecting the name, height, birthdate, sex, martial status of an <mark>individual</mark>

The Universe and Population help contextualise the Unit Type further, however they do so in different ways.

**Universe**<br>
A Universe contextualises a Unit Type by providing additional characteristics, defining a certain group of people, objects, institutions or events. 

For example...<br>
- Individuals with a university degree
- Individuals with an employment contract for a tech company
- Retail business establishments

In this way, the Universe is the larger group that the study's conclusions might apply to, based on the sample. However, while the Universe details further characteristics, it does not contextualise the Unit Type by georgaphy or time. 

For the example dataset, if the data was only collected for adults aged 18-50, the Universe would be individuals aged 18-50. This means we could compare Universe metadata from studies conducted at different times and/or locations so you can compare trends observed for adults aged 18-30.

A Universe may also be defined by what it excludes...<br>
- People except those with a university degree
- Dogs without an owner

**Population**<br>
The Population contextualises the Unit Type by specifying **time and geography**. It refers to the specific group of individuals or entities from which the data is collected. 

So if the Unit Type is individuals, the **Population** could be individuals **living in the UKas of 2016**. So while Unit Type applies to all time periods and locations, Population specifies these details.

For example: 
- Households <mark>in urban areas in 2007</mark>
- All <mark>employees in the tech industry in 2012</mark>
- Dogs <mark>in Woof Re-Home Centre during 2016 - 2020</mark>


In the example dataset above, we would put the following ...

| name | label          | Unit Type                 |  Population                                    |Universe                      |
|------|----------------|---------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------|
| f_n  | first name     | Individual                | Adults aged 18-50 living in the UK as of 2016  | Adults aged 18-50
| s    | sex            | Individual                | Adults aged 18-50 living in the UK as of 2016  | Adults aged 18-50
| h    | height         | Individual                | Adults aged 18-50 living in the UK as of 2016  | Adults aged 18-50
| b_d  | birthdate      | Individual                | Adults aged 18-50 living in the UK as of 2016  | Adults aged 18-50
| m_s  | martial status | Individual                | Adults aged 18-50 living in the UK as of 2016  | Adults aged 18-50

As these variables are from a single data collection point, the Unit Type, Population and Universe will be the same. If your whole dataset only collects data from a single source, then it may be more efficient to capture the Unit Type, Population and Universe metadata at the dataset level so you don't have to repeat it in your variable metadata.

However, if your dataset compiled data from different sources and/or on different levels, you would need to specify the different Unit Type, Population and Universe for each variable.

For example, let's look at this example dataset collecting data on crop health. 

The data was collected in 2024 in England.

| Sample ID | Crop   | Date Collected | Field ID | NDVI Score | Disease Present | Farm ID | Farm Size (ha) | Region    | Avg. Rainfall (mm) | Avg. Temp (°C) |
| --------- | ------ | -------------- | ---------| ----------- | -------------- | --------|-------------|---------------| -------------------| -------------- 
| S001      | Wheat  | 2025-06-12     | F-EM01   | 0.78        | No             | Farm01  | 120         | East midlands | 55.2               | 19.1           |
| S002      | Barley | 2025-06-13     | F-NE07   | 0.65        | Yes            | Farm02  | 95          | North east    | 67.4               | 17.8           |
| S003      | Corn   | 2025-06-14     | F-SE03   | 0.82        | No             | Farm03  | 180         | South west    | 48.6               | 22.3           |
| S004      | Wheat  | 2025-06-15     | F-WM04   | 0.73        | No             | Farm01  | 120         | West midlands | 55.2               | 19.1           |

What are the different Unit Type, Universe and Population in this dataset?

<details>
<summary>Click here to find out...</summary>
<p></p>

| Sample ID     | Unit type   | Universe  | Population | 
| ------------- | ----------- | --------- | ---------- 
| Sample ID     | Crop sample |Crop samples from wheat, corn, and barley fields | Crop samples collected from wheat, corn, and barley fields on selected farms in England during the 2025 growing season
| Crop          | Crop sample |Crop samples from wheat, corn, and barley fields | Crop samples collected from wheat, corn, and barley fields on selected farms in England during the 2025 growing season
| Date collected  | Crop sample |Crop samples from wheat, corn, and barley fields | Crop samples collected from wheat, corn, and barley fields on selected farms in England during the 2025 growing season
| Field ID        | Field       | Fields growing wheat, corn and barley  | Selected fields in England growing wheat, corn and barley in 2025
| NVDI score      | Crop sample |Crop samples from wheat, corn, and barley fields | Crop samples collected from wheat, corn, and barley fields on selected farms in England during the 2025 growing season
| Disease present | Crop sample |Crop samples from wheat, corn, and barley fields | Crop samples collected from wheat, corn, and barley fields on selected farms in England during the 2025 growing season
| Farm ID         | Farm       |Selected farms in England growing wheat, corn and barley | Selected farms in England growing wheat, corn and barley in 2025
| Farm size (ha)  | Farm       |Selected farms in England growing wheat, corn and barley| Selected farms in England growing wheat, corn and barley in 2025
| Region          | Region     |Regions contianing farms that grow wheat, corn and barley | Regions in England that contain selected farms growing wheat, corn and barley in 2025
| Avg. Rainfall (mm) | Region  |Regions contianing farms that grow wheat, corn and barley| Regions in England that contain selected farms growing wheat, corn and barley in 2025
| Avg. Temp (°C)  |Region      |Regions contianing farms that grow wheat, corn and barley | Regions in England that contain selected farms growing wheat, corn and barley in 2025

</details>

>[!NOTE]
> JJ the above example doesnt really make sense in a single data collection, so I would remove <br>
> KR Does the additional example make it more clear? // is it correct? <br>
> KR I have moved the Understanding Society example to the Question Metadata unit (2.3), though can add here instead?

>[!NOTE]
>KR referencing DDI unit type, population and universe definitions from DDI 

---

## Variable provenance 

Other important information to capture about a variable is it's provenance. The provenance describes where the variable data came from, how it was collected and how it may have changed over time.

**Derived (Y/N)**
Here you can specify whether the variable is derived from other variables or recorded directly from data collection processes (as we discussed in the begining of the unit).

**Data provenance**
> [!NOTE]
> KR Not quite sure what the main focus of data provenance should be here? Open to suggestions.

**Measurement provenance**
The measurement tool used to capture the data. For surveys or questionnaires, this could be the title and version of the questionnaire administered (inluding a link to the file if it is publicly available). For observations using technical equipment, it could be the make and design of the tool you used.

**Source reference**
Source reference allows you to be more specific about where the data came from. For example, if a piece of data came from a particular question within a questionnaire or derived from sepcific variable, you can list the Question ID or variable source here. This strengthens the provenance of your data, making your research more transparent and (re)usable.

| name | label          | Derived   | Data provenance          | Measurement provenance       |Source reference        |
|------|----------------|-----------|--------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------|
| f_n  | first name     | No        |                          | LifestyleChoices2024 V1.3                            |                            | Q_1 
| s    | sex            | No        |                          | LifestyleChoices2024 V1.3                                |                        | Q_5
| h    | height         | No        |                          | LifestyleChoices2024 V1.3                                 |                        | Q_9
| b_d  | birthdate      | No        |                          | LifestyleChoices2024 V1.3                                 |                        | Q_4
| m_s  | martial status | No        |                          | LifestyleChoices2024 V1.3                                 |                        | Q16

>[!NOTE]
> KR is the input for data provenance correct here? Or should it describe different characteristic?

---

## Variable statistics 

Once we've described the type of data and its parameters, we can then give an overview about how the variable data appears in this dataset.

**Missing value code**<br>
It is useful to include the missing value code for a variable so you can identify where there are gaps in the data. 

**Number of cases**<br>
By stating the number of cases for variable (counting the cases excluding the missing value code0, you are able to capture the size of the dataset.

**Invalid cases**<br> 
As the valid permissable range for a variable was outlined earlier, you can identify a number of invalid cases. The invalid cases should also include cases that contain other errors that mean the data should not be considered when drawing conclusions. From that you can calculate the number of invalid responses.

**Valid cases**<br>
Through subtracting invalid cases from the number of cases, you can calculate the the number of valid cases. This is can help us understand how effective a research process was and whether further investigation into how data was collected is needed. For example, if there is a comparatively high number of Invalid Cases to Valid Cases, we will probably have to look into the trustworthiness of the data before we draw conclusions. Equally, it can point to areas that you could potentially improve you data collection processes.


| Name | Label          | Missing value code        |Number of cases           |  Invalid cases                | Valid cases                |
|------|----------------|---------------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------|----------------------------|
| f_n  | first name     |  -999                     |186                       |4                              |182 
| s    | sex            |  -999                     |186                       |4                              |182    
| h    | height         |  -999                     |186                       |7                              |179
| b_d  | birthdate      |  -999                     |186                       |0                              |186
| m_s  | martial status |  -999                     |186                       |1                              |185

>[!NOTE]
> To double check, you do not calculate missing value codes in your number of cases total?

---

## Practice creating variable metadata

Using the excel metadata template, complete the Variable Metadata tab for your dataset. If you don't have a dataset to work from, download one of the teaching datasets along with the user guide listed in unit 1.1 and work through the template.

>[!NOTE]
> Should we leave the practice activity until the end so participants can see the overview of variable metadata before creating their own with the example variables? Or should we divide this into each section e.g. participants are given these variables from the start and we ask them to create it once we've done the group example.<br>
> Should we provide a couple of variable examples here in a mini dataset and ask them to complete the metadata for it? and then provide the answer in a drop down box so they have a worked example to go through?

---

## Create variable metadata for your research 

Further guidance on creating variable metadata...
- ADD resources here.

---

How we could use controlled vocabularies
Analysis unit: https://rdf-vocabulary.ddialliance.org/ddi-cv/AnalysisUnit/2.1.3/AnalysisUnit.pdf
Data type:https://rdf-vocabulary.ddialliance.org/ddi-cv/DataType/1.1.2/DataType.pdf
Numeric type: https://rdf-vocabulary.ddialliance.org/ddi-cv/NumericType/1.1.0/NumericType.pdf
Method of collection

   
