---
title: Unit 2.3 Question metadata
author: 
date: April 29, 2025
---

## Outline:
- What is question metadata
- Why is it important to capture question metadata
- Common question metadata elements

---

## Question metadata

You may collect data through questionnaires and surveys. It is important to document these questions so your metadata effectively captures the research process and details how you produced your data.

>[!NOTE]
> Inlcude here the different ways questionnaires (e.g. CAPI, hard copy etc.) can be administered and how this will change the metadata creation approach.

---

## Common question metadata elements

- Question name (R)
- Question label (R)
- Question text (R)
- Question instruction (O)
- Response domain (R)

---

## Screenshot of a questionnaire 

If you have a questionnaire you want to create metadata for, you can use that as we explore common question metadata elements.

You can also work through the example questionnaire available alongside this unit. We will breakdown the questionnaire elements so we can identify what to describe and how.

>[!NOTE]
> Show a screenshot of the example questionnaire you will be working from.
---

## Question name, label, text 

First we need to describe the question itself. This includes capturing the question text and instruction as they appear on the origianl questionnaire document.

| Question name | Question label          | Question text              |  Question instruction              |
|---------------|-------------------------|----------------------------|------------------------------------|
|               |                         |                            |                                    |
|               |                         |                            |                                    |
|               |                         |                            |                                    |

- Question name: a unique reference name for that question
- Question label: a short description of what the question is measuring 


---
## Response domain

Response domain defines the allowable set of answers or response options for a given question. It establishes the range or boundaries of valid responses, which can be either fixed or variable depending on the type of question. 

Types of response domains:
- Code
- Numeric
- Text
- Date/time

| Question name | Question label          | Question text              |  Question instruction              | Response Domain             |
|---------------|-------------------------|----------------------------|------------------------------------|-----------------------------|
|               |                         |                            |                                    |
|               |                         |                            |                                    |
|               |                         |                            |                                    |

---
## Practice creating question metadata


---

