---
title: 2.4 Codes and Categories
author: 
date: April 29, 2025
---

- What is a code
- Understanding categories
- Classifications

---

## What is a codelist?

As we explored in the previous units, codelist is a type of value representation or response domain.

Why do you think it is important to capture metadata for codelists? 

With the following variable metadata...

| Name | Label          | Value representation | Data type            |
|------|----------------|----------------------|----------------------|
| f_n  | first name     |  text                 | string
| s    | sex            | code list             | numeric                        
| h    | height         | numeric               | postive integer                       
| b_d  | birthdate      | date                  | [ISO 8601](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html#:~:text=Therefore%2C%20the%20order%20of%20the,27%2018%3A00%3A00.000.)                          
| m_s  | martial status | code list            | numeric  

Do we have enough information to understand the data in the example dataset we looked at in unit 2.2...

| f_n  | h   | b_d        | s    | m_s  | 
|------|-----|------------|------|------|
| John | 178 | 1998-09-02 | 2    | 3
| Gill | 200 | 1934-06-12 | 1    | 4
| Alice| 182 | 1922-12-24 | 4    | 1
| Fred | 168 | 2001-05-16 | 5    | 2
| Laura| 156 | 2011-03-05 | 3    | 1

Do you know what 1 means for the variable 'Sex'?
Do you know what 3 means for the variable 'Marital status'?

Equally, if the codes were represented by letters, would that become more clear?

| f_n  | h   | b_d        | s    | m_s  | 
|------|-----|------------|------|------|
| John | 178 | 1998-09-02 | Fm   | M
| Gill | 200 | 1934-06-12 | M    | W
| Alice| 182 | 1922-12-24 | NS   | S
| Fred | 168 | 2001-05-16 | Fd   | D
| Laura| 156 | 2011-03-05 | NB   | S

Codes are a sign that are paired to a meaning. Sometimes the meaning can be inferred by the code. For example, you might interpet 'S' for marital status means 'Single'. However, guessing the meaning of codes in this way can cause errors. For example 'S' could signify 'Separated'. In itself, a code has no meaning instead it's a symbol signalling another term which has been associated with the code. As part of our metadata creation, it is important that we define codes so they have meaning.

If you don't have codelist metadata ...
- You will not know what codes mean and will have to either guess or take time consuming processes such as contacting the data creator
- It takes more time and resource to interpret and understand a dataset
- The meaning of codes are forgotten and/or lost
- Diminishes the value of your variable/question metadata as you are not sure what data is collected

---

## Defining a codelist

- You don't know what codes mean
- The same code could mean different things in different codelists within the same datasets

If we don't define what codes mean:
- It becomes difficult for other people/yourself to easily understand and interpret data
- The meaning of codes are forgotten and/or lost
- Diminishes the value of your variable/question metadata as you are not sure what data is collected

In itself, a code has no meaning instead it's a symbol signalling another term which has been associated with the code. As part of our metadata creation, it is important that we define codes within a codelist so they have meaning.

::: 
notes: Representations – Codes and Categories:  DDI Alliance Training Library, Version 1.0, DDI Alliance, DDI Train the Trainer Workshop, DDI Training Working Group
:::

---
## Code meaning: categories

The meaning of codes are commonly categories. Categories describe the possible responses to a variable or question. 

For example:

- Categories for Gender:
  - Male
  - Female
  - Non-Binary
  - Prefer Not to Answer

- Codes for GENDER:
   - 1 = Male
   - 2 = Female
   - 3 = Non-Binary
   - 4 = Prefer Not to Answer

---
## Code metadata 

So what code metadata should your create?

- Codelist name
- Codelist label
- Codelist description
- Codes
- Category

---
## Codelist name, label and description

First, you need to describe the codelist itself.

Codelist name is a unique identifier for that code set. 
Codelist label is short description of what the codelist refers to.
Codelist description provides a longer explanation to what the codelist describes.

---
## Codes and categories 

Once you have defined your codelist, you need to provide the list of codes and categories that it includes.

For example:
- Code list
  - Code 1
  - Code 2
  - Code 3 

These codes will be paired with a category which provides their meaning:

For example:
  - Code 1 - Catergory 1
  - Code 2 - Category 2
  - Code 3 - Category 3

---
## Categories and controlled vocabularies

Where possible, it is best practice to use controlled vocabularies to define your categories. This is especially important when sharing your (meta)data more widely, as different people may interpret the same category in different ways.

For example:
- XXX could mean

If you use a controlled vocabulary to define your code, you need to document what controlled vocabulary you use. There are multiple ways you could do this.

- Shorthand: you can input a URI/DOI to the category metadata field, pointing directly to a category definition within a controlled vocabulary.
- Longer form documentation: in addition to the category field, you add controlled vocabulary and URI. For example:
  - [Add table of term, controlled vocab and URI]

---
## Reusing codelists

In some cases, you may be able to reuse a codelist for multiple variable representations or question responses.

For example, in Understanding Society, codelist ['CG_FF_HA' is used for multiple variables](https://discovery.closer.ac.uk/item/uk.iser.ukhls/1a12bdbb-f42f-47dd-8512-3132a325dad6/1) 

Reusing code and categories will save time in documenting and managing your (meta)data.

---


