---
title: 2.5 Concept metadata
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed, Hayley Mills
date: April 29, 2025 edited February 2026
---

# Unit 2.5 Concept metadata

## Overview

!!! example ""

    **Unit study time**
    2 hours

    **Intended Learning Outcome**
    By the end of the unit, you will ...

---

## What is a concept?

Concepts are a fundamental component of collecting data. Think back to the Concept -> Measure -> Data flow in unit 1.1 of the Introduction Course. Concepts form the semantic foundation of research data, they describe what is being measured. 

But what is a concept?

Concepts are a unit of meaning. They are an idea with a formal definition and a name, and they consist of a unique combination of characteristics.

For example...

- Person
- Apple
- Lion
- Gender
- Marital status
- Employment status
- Satisfaction with healthcare
- Academic discipline

If concepts are a unit of meaning, how do we define a unit?

For example ...

**What is a lion?** NB this looks like it was taken from DDI training slides

We define concepts through their characteristics. It's through these characteristics that we can differentiate between different concepts.

For example...

|Tiger                           | Lion      |
|--------------------------------|-----------|
| Large feline                   | Large feline
| Coarse fur                     | Coarse fur
| Orange and black colored       | Tawny colored
| Lives in groups called streaks | Lives in groups called prides
| Lives in East and South Asia   | Lives in Africa or North West India
| Stripes                        | No stripes

Concepts can be broad, e.g. big cats, or they can be narrow, e.g. Lion. In this way, concepts related to other concepts are be considered sub-concepts of a broader concept.

For example, the concepts ...

- Lion
- Tiger
- Panther
- Jaguar
  
Can be considered sub-concepts of big cats when grouped together.

---


## Concept metadata

Where would you include concept information in your metadata? 

As all research aims to measure a concept, you can create concept metadata at a broad level (e.g. in your project or dataset metadata) and/or at a granular level (e.g. in your variable, question and category metadata). 

**Variable, question and category metadata**
- A question, variable, or group of variables are designed to measure and describe a particular concept. For example, the question 'What is your marital status?' is designed to capture the concept 'marital status' of a person. This means you can add concept metadata to a question and variable metadata. In your codelist metadata, you can list the concept for each category. 
<p></p>

**Dataset and project metadata**
- As concepts can also be broad, at a higher level, you can capture concept data for a research project as a whole or for each dataset. This will provide the main topic that the research or dataset relates to.


---

## Concept metadata and interoperability

Let's unpack how concept metadata makes different metadata more interoperable.

**Codelists**<br>

Across different datasets, you might have different codelists to capture information about the same concept.

| Dataset 1 | Dataset 2      | Dataset 3   | Dataset 4       |
|------|-----------|--------|------------------------------|
|   S  | Single    | 1      | Never married     | 
|   M  | Married   | 2      | Married           | 
|   D  | Divorced  | 3      | Divorced          | 
|   W  | Widowed   | 4      | Widowed           | 
|      |           | 5      | Separated         | 
|      |           |        | Engaged           | 

While each codelist has different categories (indicating different sub-concepts for marital status), the concept metadata tell us that they all relate to marital status. So even when data is collected in different ways, we can identify when data might be comparable or related to each other. It can also help us understand how a particular concept is defined, and whether that definition has evolved over time or changes in different contexts.

**Variables**<br>

Variables across different datasets and research projects may measure the same concept. However, as they have different labels and names we wouldn't necessarily know that they are comparable unless we explored each dataset in-depth. This would be a time consuming process and we would most likely miss variables that could be comparable. 

For example, the variables...

- Dataset 1: MS_22
- Dataset 2: prtnr
- Dataset 3: signif_othr
- Dataset 4: relationshipstat

all measure marital status. If the overall project or dataset was not focused on marital status (e.g. Dataset 1 could be collecting data about mental health in adults whereas Dataset 4 could be collecting data about access to adult education services), we wouldn't necessarily know that there are variables within those datasets that we could use and compare for further research.

Therefore, by stating the concept of each of variable, we provide a quick and easy way to understand what data is included in a project, even if it is not the main focus of the project. This enables a projects' data to go further and be used as secondary data or cross-study comparison. 

>[!NOTE]
> SW -  remove last sentence in paragraph above as this has been stated earlier in the text

**Questions**<br>

- Are you currently married?
- What is your marital status?
- Are you in a legal partnership?
- What is legal partnership status

Even though the representation is different, the concept that the data measures, marital status, remains the same.

Each of the categories that the codes represent in a codelist are also a concept in themselves, for example...
- Married
- Divorced
- Single
- Widowed
- Separated
- Engaged

This means you can have broader concepts which have fewer characteristics defining them, and narrower concepts that have more characteristics.

For example, martial status refers to a person's situation with regard to whether one is single, married, separated, divorced, or widowed.[^1]

Whereas, the concept 'married' refers specifically to people who are united in marriage and have signed a legal document confirming their union.

[^1]: Oxford Dictionary 


### What are the benefits of documenting concept metadata?

If we capture concept metadata, we make our research data more interoperable and open up the possibility for cross-study comparison. For example, even if datasets from different projects used different data collection methods or were conducted in a different time and/or place, there could still be comparable data across them. This enables space for new research and findings, beyond the parameters  of the original research projects. As such, data goes further and supports further investigations.


Need to think about why the idea of concepts is important, people inherently know what a concept is and for many things can categorise easily using characteristics and examples , but a machine can't do this, so we need to document what we mean through definitions. Can't rely on names but on the definition. People might use the same names to mean different things because of cultural, temporal or other contexts e.g. Asian is different in USA and UK. Find example of changing concept over time - maybe gender?


