foundation/2.5 Codes and Categories.md, before:

---
title: 2.5 Codes and Categories
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed
date: April 29, 2025
---

# Unit 2.5 Codes and Categories

## Overview

### Unit study time
2 hours

### Intended Learning Outcome
By the end of the unit, you will ...

### Outline

---

## What is a codelist?

As we explored in the previous units, codelist is a type of value representation or response domain.

Simply, codelists are a list of codes that represent different categories. The categories are pre-defined options allowed for a particular variable or question. These categories are represented by codes in datasets in order to enable data analysis and processing.

Why do you think it is important to capture metadata for codelists? 

With the following variable metadata...

| Name | Label          | Value representation | Data type            |
|------|----------------|----------------------|----------------------|
| f_n  | first name     |  text                 | string
| s    | sex            | code list             | numeric                        
| h    | height         | numeric               | postive integer                       
| b_d  | birthdate      | date                  | [ISO 8601](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html#:~:text=Therefore%2C%20the%20order%20of%20the,27%2018%3A00%3A00.000.)                          
| m_s  | martial status | code list            | numeric  

Do we have enough information to understand the data in the example dataset we looked at in unit 2.2...

| f_n  | h   | b_d        | s    | m_s  | 
|------|-----|------------|------|------|
| John | 178 | 1998-09-02 | 2    | 3
| Gill | 200 | 1934-06-12 | 1    | 4
| Alice| 182 | 1922-12-24 | 4    | 1
| Fred | 168 | 2001-05-16 | 5    | 2
| Laura| 156 | 2011-03-05 | 3    | 1

Do you know what the code '1' means for the variable 'Sex'?
Do you know what the code '3' means for the variable 'Marital status'?

Equally, if the codes were represented by letters, would that become more clear?

| f_n  | h   | b_d        | s    | m_s  | 
|------|-----|------------|------|------|
| John | 178 | 1998-09-02 | Fm   | M
| Gill | 200 | 1934-06-12 | M    | W
| Alice| 182 | 1922-12-24 | NS   | S
| Fred | 168 | 2001-05-16 | Fd   | D
| Laura| 156 | 2011-03-05 | NB   | S

As codes are just a sign to represent a category, we need information about the categories to assign meaning to the codes and understand the data. Sometimes the category can be inferred by the code. For example, you might interpet 'S' for marital status means 'Single'. However, guessing the meaning of codes in this way can cause errors. For example 'S' could signify 'Separated'. In itself, a code has no meaning instead it's a symbol signalling another term which has been associated with the code. As part of our metadata creation, it is important that we define codes so they have meaning.

Moreover, the same code could have a different meaning in different codelists within the same datasets. "For example, "M" in the variable "s" means "male", whereas "M" in the variable "m_s" means "married

If you don't have codelist metadata ...
- You will not know what codes mean and will have to either guess or take time consuming processes such as contacting the data creator
- It takes more time and resource to interpret and understand a dataset
- The meaning of codes are forgotten and/or lost
- Diminishes the value of your variable/question metadata as you are not sure what data is collected


>[!NOTE]
> BO - should this come earlier? When I was reviewing the previous unit, I was wondering if everyone will know a code list is. <br>
> KR - I feel codelist metadata has a narrower focus so was thinking of looking at variable and quesiton metadata and point people towards the code and category unit to go further in depth. However, I can have a look at how codelists have been explained in the previous units to make sure that there is a clear starting definition.

::: 
notes: Representations – Codes and Categories:  DDI Alliance Training Library, Version 1.0, DDI Alliance, DDI Train the Trainer Workshop, DDI Training Working Group
:::

---
## Code metadata 

So what code metadata should you create for codelists?

- Codelist name
- Codelist label
- Codelist description
- Codes
- Category

>[!NOTE]
> BO - should the title be "code list metadata"?

First, you need to describe the codelist itself. This is particularly important if your dataset contains different codelists for different variabales.

**Codelist name**<br>
Codelist name is a unique identifier for that code set. 

**Codelist label**<br>
Codelist label is short description of what the codelist refers to.

**Codelist description**<br>
Codelist description provides a longer explanation to what the codelist describes.

| Codelist name      | Codelist label      | Code list description | 
|--------------------|---------------------|-----------------------|
| person_gender_si   | Gender of person    | Six gender categories for self-identification          | 
| person_m_s       | Marital status of person  | Seven marital status categories for self-identification    |                         

---
## Code meaning: categories

Once you describe the purpose of the codelist and the codes it includes, you then need to describe the codes themselves. 

The meaning of codes are called categories. Categories assign meaning to the codes.

Let's look at describing the codes for the codelist person_gender_si.

The two examples use different codes for gender are...

| Example one       | Example 2       |
|-------------------|-------------------------|
| - 1<br> - 2<br>- 3<br>- 4 <br>- 5 <br>- 6<br>- 7<br>- 8     |- M<br>- Fm<br>- TM<br>- TFm<br>- NB<br>- Fd<br>- NS<br>- PN 

However, both examples use the same categories for gender. The categories are...
- Male
- Female
- Trans male
- Trans female
- Non-binary
- Gender fluid
- Not specified
- Prefer not to answer

In our metadata, we can then map the code to the category...


| Codelist name     | Code | Category          |  Category reference            |
|-------------------|------|-------------------|--------------------------------|
| person_gender_si    | 1    | Male            |                   
| person_gender_si    | 2    | Female          |
| person_gender_si    | 3    | Trans male      |  
| person_gender_si    | 4    | Trans Female    |                
| person_gender_si     | 5   | Non-binary      |                                      
| person_gender_si    | 6    | Gender fluid    |                             
| person_gender_si    | 7    | Prefer not to answer |        
| person_gender_si     | 8   | Not specified   |            

| Codelist name     | Code | Category          |  Category reference            |
|-------------------|------|-------------------|--------------------------------|
| person_gender_si    | M    | Male            |                   
| person_gender_si    | Fm    | Female          |
| person_gender_si    | TM    | Trans male      |  
| person_gender_si    | TFm    | Trans Female    |                
| person_gender_si     | NB   | Non-binary      |                                      
| person_gender_si    | Fd    | Gender fluid    |                             
| person_gender_si    | PN    | Prefer not to answer |        
| person_gender_si     | NS   | Not specified   |            


---

## Codelists and controlled vocabularies

When designing a questionnaire and creating codelists for questions, it is best practice to use controlled vocabularies to define your categories. This is especially important when sharing your data more widely, as different people may interpret the same category in different ways. If you use a controlled vocabulary to define a category, you will need to document what controlled vocabulary you used. To do this, you can create a 'Category reference' column. In this column, you can input a URI/DOI  pointing directly to a category definition within a controlled vocabulary.

For example, you could reference the following glossaries...
- https://gscc.msu.edu/education/glossary.html#gender
- [Homosarus](https://homosaurus.org/v4)
- [Europa Grammatical Gender](https://op.europa.eu/en/web/eu-vocabularies/dataset/-/resource?uri=http://publications.europa.eu/resource/dataset/grammatical-gender)

| Codelist name     | Code | Category          |  Category reference            |
|-------------------|------|-------------------|--------------------------------|
| person_gender_si    | 1    | Male            |                   
| person_gender_si    | 2    | Female          |
| person_gender_si    | 3    | Trans male      |  
| person_gender_si    | 4    | Trans Female    |                
| person_gender_si     | 5   | Non-binary      |                                      
| person_gender_si    | 6    | Gender fluid    |                             
| person_gender_si    | 7    | Prefer not to answer |        
| person_gender_si     | 8   | Not specified   |            

You may also want to draw on an already defined codelist that has been established by a core institution. These codelists will already oultline the code and defined categories.

For example, for gender categories, you may use ...
- [UK Government list](https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/642bf367fbe620000f17dbc7/CBDS_RFC_1233_-_Sex_and_Gender_Identity.pdf)
- [The Office of National Statistics list](https://www.ons.gov.uk/census/census2021dictionary/variablesbytopic/ethnicgroupnationalidentitylanguageandreligionvariablescensus2021/nationalidentity/classifications)

| Codelist name     | Codelist reference        |
|-------------------|---------------------------|
|person_gender_si   | [ONS_gender_identity_8a](https://www.ons.gov.uk/census/census2021dictionary/variablesbytopic/ethnicgroupnationalidentitylanguageandreligionvariablescensus2021/nationalidentity/classifications)


>[!NOTE]
> BO - this is good and I think it relates to a comment in the previous unit about providing guidance on what categories to use. I think this suggests that this unit might be better placed either before, or integrated into, the previous unit? Or not really going into the code list stuff at all in the previous unit and putting it all here instead? What do you think?

>[!NOTE]
>SW - personally i think having all the code list info together in this current module makes more sense. The question metadata module has a lot of info in it so this seems like a discreet way to split things up into slightly smaller chunks.

---
## Reusing codelists

In some cases, you may be able to reuse a codelist for multiple variable representations or question responses.

For example, in Understanding Society, codelist ['CG_FF_HA' is used for multiple variables](https://discovery.closer.ac.uk/item/uk.iser.ukhls/1a12bdbb-f42f-47dd-8512-3132a325dad6/1) 

Reusing code and categories will save time in documenting and managing your (meta)data.

>[!NOTE]
> BO - should the above say "Reusing code list values and categories"? or just "Reusing code lists"?

>[!NOTE]
>SW - I think reusing codelists is fine for a short, punchier sub-heading and we can add a clarification sentence underneath that categories, values and caridnality must all be exactly the same.

For example
https://op.europa.eu/en/web/eu-vocabularies/code-lists
https://www.ons.gov.uk/census/census2021dictionary/variablesbytopic
https://ontobee.org/ontology/GSSO

---

Commit message:

Refine codelist metadata section and notes
Updated terminology from 'Code metadata' to 'Codelist metadata' and clarified notes on codelist reuse.

foundation/2.5 Codes and Categories.md, after:

---
title: 2.5 Codes and Categories
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed
date: April 29, 2025
---

# Unit 2.5 Codes and Categories

## Overview

### Unit study time
2 hours

### Intended Learning Outcome
By the end of the unit, you will ...

### Outline

---

## What is a codelist?

As we explored in the previous units, codelist is a type of value representation or response domain.

Simply, codelists are a list of codes that represent different categories. The categories are pre-defined options allowed for a particular variable or question. These categories are represented by codes in datasets in order to enable data analysis and processing.

Why do you think it is important to capture metadata for codelists? 

With the following variable metadata...

| Name | Label          | Value representation | Data type            |
|------|----------------|----------------------|----------------------|
| f_n  | first name     |  text                 | string
| s    | sex            | code list             | numeric                        
| h    | height         | numeric               | postive integer                       
| b_d  | birthdate      | date                  | [ISO 8601](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html#:~:text=Therefore%2C%20the%20order%20of%20the,27%2018%3A00%3A00.000.)                          
| m_s  | martial status | code list            | numeric  

Do we have enough information to understand the data in the example dataset we looked at in unit 2.2...

| f_n  | h   | b_d        | s    | m_s  | 
|------|-----|------------|------|------|
| John | 178 | 1998-09-02 | 2    | 3
| Gill | 200 | 1934-06-12 | 1    | 4
| Alice| 182 | 1922-12-24 | 4    | 1
| Fred | 168 | 2001-05-16 | 5    | 2
| Laura| 156 | 2011-03-05 | 3    | 1

Do you know what the code '1' means for the variable 'Sex'?
Do you know what the code '3' means for the variable 'Marital status'?

Equally, if the codes were represented by letters, would that become more clear?

| f_n  | h   | b_d        | s    | m_s  | 
|------|-----|------------|------|------|
| John | 178 | 1998-09-02 | Fm   | M
| Gill | 200 | 1934-06-12 | M    | W
| Alice| 182 | 1922-12-24 | NS   | S
| Fred | 168 | 2001-05-16 | Fd   | D
| Laura| 156 | 2011-03-05 | NB   | S

As codes are just a sign to represent a category, we need information about the categories to assign meaning to the codes and understand the data. Sometimes the category can be inferred by the code. For example, you might interpet 'S' for marital status means 'Single'. However, guessing the meaning of codes in this way can cause errors. For example 'S' could signify 'Separated'. In itself, a code has no meaning instead it's a symbol signalling another term which has been associated with the code. As part of our metadata creation, it is important that we define codes so they have meaning.

Moreover, the same code could have a different meaning in different codelists within the same datasets. "For example, "M" in the variable "s" means "male", whereas "M" in the variable "m_s" means "married

If you don't have codelist metadata ...
- You will not know what codes mean and will have to either guess or take time consuming processes such as contacting the data creator
- It takes more time and resource to interpret and understand a dataset
- The meaning of codes are forgotten and/or lost
- Diminishes the value of your variable/question metadata as you are not sure what data is collected


>[!NOTE]
> BO - should this come earlier? When I was reviewing the previous unit, I was wondering if everyone will know a code list is. <br>
> KR - I feel codelist metadata has a narrower focus so was thinking of looking at variable and quesiton metadata and point people towards the code and category unit to go further in depth. However, I can have a look at how codelists have been explained in the previous units to make sure that there is a clear starting definition.

::: 
notes: Representations – Codes and Categories:  DDI Alliance Training Library, Version 1.0, DDI Alliance, DDI Train the Trainer Workshop, DDI Training Working Group
:::

---
## Codelist metadata 

So what code metadata should you create for codelists?

- Codelist name
- Codelist label
- Codelist description
- Codes
- Category

First, you need to describe the codelist itself. This is particularly important if your dataset contains different codelists for different variabales.

**Codelist name**<br>
Codelist name is a unique identifier for that code set. 

**Codelist label**<br>
Codelist label is short description of what the codelist refers to.

**Codelist description**<br>
Codelist description provides a longer explanation to what the codelist describes.

| Codelist name      | Codelist label      | Code list description | 
|--------------------|---------------------|-----------------------|
| person_gender_si   | Gender of person    | Six gender categories for self-identification          | 
| person_m_s       | Marital status of person  | Seven marital status categories for self-identification    |                         

---
## Code meaning: categories

Once you describe the purpose of the codelist and the codes it includes, you then need to describe the codes themselves. 

The meaning of codes are called categories. Categories assign meaning to the codes.

Let's look at describing the codes for the codelist person_gender_si.

The two examples use different codes for gender are...

| Example one       | Example 2       |
|-------------------|-------------------------|
| - 1<br> - 2<br>- 3<br>- 4 <br>- 5 <br>- 6<br>- 7<br>- 8     |- M<br>- Fm<br>- TM<br>- TFm<br>- NB<br>- Fd<br>- NS<br>- PN 

However, both examples use the same categories for gender. The categories are...
- Male
- Female
- Trans male
- Trans female
- Non-binary
- Gender fluid
- Not specified
- Prefer not to answer

In our metadata, we can then map the code to the category...


| Codelist name     | Code | Category          |  Category reference            |
|-------------------|------|-------------------|--------------------------------|
| person_gender_si    | 1    | Male            |                   
| person_gender_si    | 2    | Female          |
| person_gender_si    | 3    | Trans male      |  
| person_gender_si    | 4    | Trans Female    |                
| person_gender_si     | 5   | Non-binary      |                                      
| person_gender_si    | 6    | Gender fluid    |                             
| person_gender_si    | 7    | Prefer not to answer |        
| person_gender_si     | 8   | Not specified   |            

| Codelist name     | Code | Category          |  Category reference            |
|-------------------|------|-------------------|--------------------------------|
| person_gender_si    | M    | Male            |                   
| person_gender_si    | Fm    | Female          |
| person_gender_si    | TM    | Trans male      |  
| person_gender_si    | TFm    | Trans Female    |                
| person_gender_si     | NB   | Non-binary      |                                      
| person_gender_si    | Fd    | Gender fluid    |                             
| person_gender_si    | PN    | Prefer not to answer |        
| person_gender_si     | NS   | Not specified   |            


---

## Codelists and controlled vocabularies

When designing a questionnaire and creating codelists for questions, it is best practice to use controlled vocabularies to define your categories. This is especially important when sharing your data more widely, as different people may interpret the same category in different ways. If you use a controlled vocabulary to define a category, you will need to document what controlled vocabulary you used. To do this, you can create a 'Category reference' column. In this column, you can input a URI/DOI  pointing directly to a category definition within a controlled vocabulary.

For example, you could reference the following glossaries...
- https://gscc.msu.edu/education/glossary.html#gender
- [Homosarus](https://homosaurus.org/v4)
- [Europa Grammatical Gender](https://op.europa.eu/en/web/eu-vocabularies/dataset/-/resource?uri=http://publications.europa.eu/resource/dataset/grammatical-gender)

| Codelist name     | Code | Category          |  Category reference            |
|-------------------|------|-------------------|--------------------------------|
| person_gender_si    | 1    | Male            |                   
| person_gender_si    | 2    | Female          |
| person_gender_si    | 3    | Trans male      |  
| person_gender_si    | 4    | Trans Female    |                
| person_gender_si     | 5   | Non-binary      |                                      
| person_gender_si    | 6    | Gender fluid    |                             
| person_gender_si    | 7    | Prefer not to answer |        
| person_gender_si     | 8   | Not specified   |            

You may also want to draw on an already defined codelist that has been established by a core institution. These codelists will already oultline the code and defined categories.

For example, for gender categories, you may use ...
- [UK Government list](https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/642bf367fbe620000f17dbc7/CBDS_RFC_1233_-_Sex_and_Gender_Identity.pdf)
- [The Office of National Statistics list](https://www.ons.gov.uk/census/census2021dictionary/variablesbytopic/ethnicgroupnationalidentitylanguageandreligionvariablescensus2021/nationalidentity/classifications)

| Codelist name     | Codelist reference        |
|-------------------|---------------------------|
|person_gender_si   | [ONS_gender_identity_8a](https://www.ons.gov.uk/census/census2021dictionary/variablesbytopic/ethnicgroupnationalidentitylanguageandreligionvariablescensus2021/nationalidentity/classifications)


>[!NOTE]
> BO - this is good and I think it relates to a comment in the previous unit about providing guidance on what categories to use. I think this suggests that this unit might be better placed either before, or integrated into, the previous unit? Or not really going into the code list stuff at all in the previous unit and putting it all here instead? What do you think?

>[!NOTE]
>SW - personally i think having all the code list info together in this current module makes more sense. The question metadata module has a lot of info in it so this seems like a discreet way to split things up into slightly smaller chunks.

---
## Reusing codelists

In some cases, you may be able to reuse a codelist for multiple variable representations or question responses.

For example, in Understanding Society, codelist ['CG_FF_HA' is used for multiple variables](https://discovery.closer.ac.uk/item/uk.iser.ukhls/1a12bdbb-f42f-47dd-8512-3132a325dad6/1) 

To reuse a codelist, the codes and 

Reusing code and categories will save time in documenting and managing your (meta)data.

>[!NOTE]
> BO - should the above say "Reusing code list values and categories"? or just "Reusing code lists"?

>[!NOTE]
>SW - I think reusing codelists is fine for a short, punchier sub-heading and we can add a clarification sentence underneath that categories, values and caridnality must all be exactly the same.

For example
https://op.europa.eu/en/web/eu-vocabularies/code-lists
https://www.ons.gov.uk/census/census2021dictionary/variablesbytopic
https://ontobee.org/ontology/GSSO

---
