---
title: Unit 3.1
collaborators: Jon Johnson, Hayley Mills
date: February 2026
---

# Unit 3.1 Metadata relationships.

## Overview

!!! example ""

    **Unit study time**
    1 hour

    **Intended Learning Outcome**
    By the end of the unit, you will ...

---
So far in the course, we have looked at different types of metadata and how we define each of the items or elements. The introduction to metadata course, demonstrated how we need to itemise each metadata element in order for us to be able to manage them using a computer. In this unit we will demonstrate why this is important and how many of these pieces fit together.

It can be tempting to put all information in one place — for example, attaching the concept, population, question wording, codes, categories, universe, and dataset details directly to a variable. But good metadata management keeps these items separate and defines relationships between them. 

Think about all the metadata items we have discussed and imagine you have a dataset that you want to add your metadata to, if you embed all that information to the variable level you would need to include the study level, and dataset level information as variables within your dataset, including the study title, PI, universe, population etc., this would be repeated for every row in your data file, and possibly multiple data files, and would be clunky, unnecessarily large to use this dataset, as you have columns which are not actually variables you want to analyse necessarily. Or think about how you would include the categories to a code list response from a question? You could add all the categories to one cell for each question, but that makes it difficult to manage the individual categories, alternativley you could seperate them out into different cells which would be more appropriate, but if you keep them together with the question, you would need to repeat the question information for each row. The issues arise because of the different ways these elements relate to each other, in these examples, either at different conceptual levels, or because of the multiplicity. 

- Repeating higher‑level metadata at lower levels leads to redundancy. This makes the data file: unnecessarily large, difficult to maintain, prone to inconsistencies, conceptually messy (metadata mixed with analytic variables).
- Adding multiple items into a single cell means it becomes unreadable, hard to manage, hard to edit, hard to reference

**Reasons to manage items separately** 
-  Avoiding duplication (and the Errors That Come With It). Keeping items separate means consistency across the entire study.
-  Supporting reuse (Across Waves, Studies, or Projects),  reduces effort and increases long‑term value. e.g. a question can link to many variables, a  a concept can link multiple questions
-  Machine readability and automation
-  More clarity and meaning. If information is collapsed users must rely on long descriptions, relationships become invisible, errors and misinterpretations become more likely
-  Scalability 

So we have our item level metadata and know what each piece of information is we need to understand how different pieces connect in order for metadata to be used usefully. We need to provide the link or links between the variable and the study or the question and the response categories for example. 

Relationships help us organise, manage, discover, and reuse information effectively.

The following section will describe how key metadata components relate to one another and why managing relationships is central to managing metadata.

## Recap of key metadata and how they relate to each other
- **Study** - The overarching research activity. A study may contain multiple data collections.
- **Data collection** - 
- **Dataset** - A specific data file or collection of records produced by a study. A study can produce many datasets (e.g. wave-specific files, derived datasets, linked data). A dataset belongs to a study. 
- **Variable** - The column in a dataset representing a measurable attribute (e.g. “height at age 11”, “housing tenure”) collected about a unit. A dataset contains many variables.
- **Measurement / Question** -  Variables originate from specific measurements or question items. A single question/measurement may produce one or more variables.
- **Concept** - The underlying idea being captured (e.g. “physical activity”, “socio‑economic status”) by a question or measure. Concepts help different teams speak the same language and enable harmonisation across studies.
- **Unit Type** - The type of entity being measured (e.g. person, household, school). Variables are always attahced to a unit type, as they are made up of individual units.
- **Universe** - Defines who or what is eligible to be within the study. Sub-universes can define who is eligible to answer a particular question or have a variable measured.
- **Population** - The group which the units are drawn for at a specific time and place. 





These relationships allow users to trace a variable back to its origin, understand its context, and interpret it accurately. They relationships provide context and meaning. For example if we have the variable income on it's own it is ambiguous:

By managing relationships effectively, we help both humans and machines answer key questions:
- What is this thing? (e.g. a variable measuring income)
- What does it represent? (concept)
- Who does it apply to? (unit type and universe)
- Where did it come from? (question, instrument, dataset, study)
- How does it relate to other things? (derived variable, classification scheme)

Understanding these relationships ensures that variables and questions can be interpreted correctly—for example, knowing which respondents answered a particular question or were eligible for a particular measure, can help you understand missing values in the assocaited variable.


## Managing Metadata is Managing Relationships
When we talk about managing metadata, we are not managing the data itself.
Instead, we are managing:
- the structure,
- the items, and
- the relationships
between different items of information.

Good metadata management involves:
- Grouping real world things of the same items (e.g. all variables, all concepts, all datasets)
- Describing how they relate to one another (e.g. “this variable comes from this question in this dataset for this subset of the population”)
- Making these connections understandable to both humans and machines so tools can present information clearly, automate processes, create efficient research workflows

Managing relationships provides clarity about; what the metadata item is, how it fits within the wider structure, and how it should be used for both humans and computers. 


Relationships between metadata add semantic context.
Instead of isolated facts, you get a connected story:
Experiment ↔ version ↔ date ↔ location
This helps others (and future-you) understand why the data exists, not just what it is.
“This dataset was generated by this method, using this instrument, for this project.”


**Summary of benefits of managing metadata relationships**
- relationships explain how things fit together. Moves from isolated facts to a meaningful network. A variable on its own tells you what it measures. A variable with relationships can tell you; which question produced it, which concept it reflects, which universe was eligible to answer it etc.
- relationships turn the metadata into a dynamic, navigable structure which can allow you to actively use the metadat to;
- - trace provenance
  - move between linked items
  - automate documentation
  - support harmonisation
  - automatically generate questionnaires or data dictionaries
- relationshiops can tell you  how to use something correctly. They supply the context that enables correct interpretation and analysis.
- relationships prevent duplication. They allow you to store each item once and link it wherever needed. This reduces workload, prevents divergence, and supports consistency across waves and studies.
- relationships support reuse and make  metadata scalable and efficient.
- relationships make metadata machine-actionable.

A helpful analogy:
Item-level metadata gives you the words.
Relationships give you the sentences, meaning, and story.
Without relationships, you have a dictionary but not a language.
