foundation/4.1 Creating metadata.md, before:

---
title: Unit 4.1
collaborators: Jon Johnson, Hayley Mills
date: February 2026
---

# Unit 4.1 Creating metadata

## Overview

!!! example ""

    **Unit study time**
    1 hour

    **Intended Learning Outcome**
    By the end of the unit, you will ...

---

## What metadata should you create?


There is no singular, universally-agreed set of minimum metadata requirements. If you look on the internet, there are a variety of suggestions which are often discipline or resource specific. With extensive metadata, your data is more discoverable, understandable and (re)usable. However, the amount of metadata you create can be a trade-off between time and resource.

Common metadata elements that are frequently used across disciplines and resources describe the who, what, where, when and how of the research. Beyond this, what metadata you create depends on the scope and aims of your research project.  

**To identify what metadata to create, you could consider the following questions ...**


**Sharing data...**

- Do you plan to share your (meta)data or is it for personal reference only?
- If you're planning to share your (meta)data, how widely will you share it? 
- Will the people who interact with your (meta)data have direct contact with you and/or your research team?
  (_note, sharing metadata does not mean the data has to be open_)

=== "Personal use"
  
        If you're not planning to share your data, you will be the main user of your metadata. You can choose metadata elements that will help you manage and preserve your data. The aim of this metadata is to help you conduct your research efficiently and help your future self to understand the data you collected. 

=== "Sharing data"
  
        If you're sharing (meta)data with external people who don't have direct contact with you, your metadata needs to provide a standalone guide to your research and data. In this scenario, metadata has the additional purpose to make your project discoverable and understandable for other people. As people won't be able to contact you easily to clarify confusing or missing information, it's important to make sure your metadata is clear, standardised and comprehensive from the get go. This means you will most likely create more metadata than a project that does not share it's (meta)data. Tools such as metadata standards and controlled vocabularies will also be fundamental in ensuring your metadata is interoperable and (re)usable by yourself and others. 

**Size of project...** 

- What is the scale of your research?
- How much data will you collect? How many different data collection methods will you use?
- How many researchers are working on the project?
- How many people will be creating the metadata?
- What time and resources do you have available?
- What software do you have available to use?

=== "Scale of research"
    If you're working on a large research project that handles a vast amount of data and data collection methods, you will need to create more metadata in order to effectively describe the different types of data and the processes undertaken to collect it. If it's a small research project, you will not need to create as much metadata.

=== "Research team"
    If you are working with a large research team, it is important to establish a clear metadata schema so metadata remains consistent and standardised. If there are multiple people creating, managing and using the metadata, following a schema will ensure the metadata remains consistent and easy to understand. If you are doing a solo research project, you may want to create your own metadata template. However, it can still be useful to follow a metadata schema and use controlled vocabularies in order to make sure your metadata is high quality.

=== "Time and resources"
    If you are working on a large research project, you may have more time and resource to create metadata. You could use specific metadata tools to help create and manage your metadata. If you are doing a small, solo project, you may not have the capacity to create extensive metadata or the access to metadata tools. In this scenario, it's important to prioritise the high value metadata for your research that support the aims of your project.


**One-off or repeated study...** 
- Is it a one-off study or a repeated study?
- If it is a repeated study, have there already been completed studies? What will the upcoming studies cover?

=== "Repeated study"
    If you are creating metadata for a repeated study, it is important to consider what metadata was captured for previous studies, including what schemas or standards were used. You should incoporate previous metadata structures into the metadata creation for any new research in the series in order to make sure your data is interoperable. If it's the first study of a series, it's important to create a robust metadata schema that can be reused for future studies.

=== "One-off study"
    For a one-off study, you have more felxibility about what metadata you create and/or what schema you use as it only needs to serve the aims of that individual project. However, it is still important to consider how you can make your (meta)data interoperable with other research projects in your field.
  

**Metadata standards and schemas...** 
- What common metadata standards are used in your discipline?
- What metadata schemas are widely available?
- Are you planning to deposit your (meta)data in a data repository and/or data catalogue? Do they provide a schema?

    === "Data repositories and catologues schemas"
  
        If you're depositing your (meta)data on data catalogues or data repositories, they may specify what metadata standards and controlled vocabularies to use. They may provide guidance or a metadata template/model, for example...

        - [CESSDA Data Model]( https://www.cessda.eu/Training/Training-Resources/Resource-crd-2592) maps out the required metadata elements needed to deposit a dataset in their data cataologue</ul>li>
        - [UK Data Service](https://ukdataservice.ac.uk/help/deposit-data/prepare-your-data-for-deposit/) gives guidance on how to prepare your metadata and documentation</li>

        Even if you're not planning to deposit your data in a repository or catalogue, they can provide easy-to-acess guidance on what metadata elements to capture and a ready made structure. You can download their metadata templates and models to use as a basis for your metadata creation.

=== "Metadata standards and schemas"

    It is good practice to identify common guidelines around metadata creation in your discipline or for a specific resource you are creating metadata for. This includes identifying widely used metadata standards and/or schemas. These can either provide the strucutre for your metadata creation or inform the approach you will take.

    **Standards for a large research project with shared data**

    Using a metadata schema and standard is essential when you are planning to share your (meta)data and reposit your research in a repository and/or catalogue. Scehmas and standards ensure that your (meta)data is interoperable and can be integrated into larger centralised systems (such as repositories and catalogues). Moreover, if you're working on larger project alongside multiple researchers, schemas and standards are great way to standardise the language you use internally, reducing the risk of confusion and miscommnuication.

    **Using metadata standards for a small research project where data is not shared**
Even if you're not planning to share your (meta)data, metadata standards and schemas will save you time in choosing what metadata elements to capture and what structure to follow. While you don't have to follow the metadata standard or schema in it's entirety, you can use it as a basis for your metadata creation. This will help you organise your metadata in a consistent way. For example, they can also provide definitions for metadata elements, valid inputs for metadata fields and controlled vocabularies so your metadata is clear and consistent. 

    While there are a few cross-discipline standards and schemas, they are mostly discipline specific. If you're planning to use a standard, it's best to identify the one you want to use before you start creating any metadata.

    You can refer to a list of common standards for different disciplines provided by the [University of Texas at Austin here](https://guides.lib.utexas.edu/metadata-basics/domain-standards). You could also use the [metadata standard catalogue](https://rdamsc.bath.ac.uk/search) to search available standards.

    For more information about standards, take a look at unit 2.6 of the Introduction course.

---

## How to create metadata

### What software should you use to create metadata?

There's no singular software you should use to create and manage metadata. You can use any software that generates and supports machine readable formats. You may then export your metadata into text based formats such as PDF, in order to create further documentation but the original file must be **machine readable** (for example, CSV, XML, SAV, XLS, JSON, RDF, SHP).

There are also tools to help make metadata creation and management easier and more efficient. These tools can be particularly useful if you're doing a large project and need to capture extensive metadata. Metadata tools can provide different different functionalities, for example: metadata management, quality review or repository compliance checkers. Depending on your needs, you may want to use more than one tool in your metadata management.

**Metadata tools include...** 
  - Online tools:
    - [Dublin Core Generator](https://nsteffel.github.io/dublin_core_generator/index.html)
  - Free open source software:
    - [Collectica for Excel (standard)](https://www.colectica.com/software/colecticaforexcel/)
    - [OpenRefine](https://openrefine.org/)
  - Commercial software:
    - [Collectica for Excel (advanced packages), questionnaire, designer](https://www.colectica.com/software/)
   
**You can further explore useful metadata tools here ...** 

- DCC provide a [list of metadata tools you can explore](https://www.dcc.ac.uk/guidance/standards/metadata/tools)
- UK Data service provide a [list of tools that can be used to explore and document data](https://ukdataservice.ac.uk/help/exploring-data/uk-data-service-online-tools-for-exploring-data/)

**Where to store metadata**

Depending on how you create your metadata, it can be stored in different locations. This includes ...
- in a spearate file alongside your data
- embedded in the data file

It is important to keep a record of where your metadata is stored so you can easily extract it when necessary.

Commit message:

Update 4.1 Creating metadata.md
added ILO from unit 1.1

foundation/4.1 Creating metadata.md, after:

---
title: Unit 4.1
collaborators: Jon Johnson, Hayley Mills
date: February 2026
---

# Unit 4.1 Creating metadata

## Overview

!!! example ""

    **Unit study time**
    1 hour

**  **Intended Learning Outcome**

    By the end of the unit, you will ...
    - Understand how metadata creation varies across projects depending on scope, size and aims of research
    - Know how to decide what metadata to create for a project
    - Know what software you can use to create and store metadata
    - Identify tools you can use to support metadata creation and implement best practice
    



## What metadata should you create?


There is no singular, universally-agreed set of minimum metadata requirements. If you look on the internet, there are a variety of suggestions which are often discipline or resource specific. With extensive metadata, your data is more discoverable, understandable and (re)usable. However, the amount of metadata you create can be a trade-off between time and resource.

Common metadata elements that are frequently used across disciplines and resources describe the who, what, where, when and how of the research. Beyond this, what metadata you create depends on the scope and aims of your research project.  

**To identify what metadata to create, you could consider the following questions ...**


**Sharing data...**

- Do you plan to share your (meta)data or is it for personal reference only?
- If you're planning to share your (meta)data, how widely will you share it? 
- Will the people who interact with your (meta)data have direct contact with you and/or your research team?
  (_note, sharing metadata does not mean the data has to be open_)

=== "Personal use"
  
        If you're not planning to share your data, you will be the main user of your metadata. You can choose metadata elements that will help you manage and preserve your data. The aim of this metadata is to help you conduct your research efficiently and help your future self to understand the data you collected. 

=== "Sharing data"
  
        If you're sharing (meta)data with external people who don't have direct contact with you, your metadata needs to provide a standalone guide to your research and data. In this scenario, metadata has the additional purpose to make your project discoverable and understandable for other people. As people won't be able to contact you easily to clarify confusing or missing information, it's important to make sure your metadata is clear, standardised and comprehensive from the get go. This means you will most likely create more metadata than a project that does not share it's (meta)data. Tools such as metadata standards and controlled vocabularies will also be fundamental in ensuring your metadata is interoperable and (re)usable by yourself and others. 

**Size of project...** 

- What is the scale of your research?
- How much data will you collect? How many different data collection methods will you use?
- How many researchers are working on the project?
- How many people will be creating the metadata?
- What time and resources do you have available?
- What software do you have available to use?

=== "Scale of research"
    If you're working on a large research project that handles a vast amount of data and data collection methods, you will need to create more metadata in order to effectively describe the different types of data and the processes undertaken to collect it. If it's a small research project, you will not need to create as much metadata.

=== "Research team"
    If you are working with a large research team, it is important to establish a clear metadata schema so metadata remains consistent and standardised. If there are multiple people creating, managing and using the metadata, following a schema will ensure the metadata remains consistent and easy to understand. If you are doing a solo research project, you may want to create your own metadata template. However, it can still be useful to follow a metadata schema and use controlled vocabularies in order to make sure your metadata is high quality.

=== "Time and resources"
    If you are working on a large research project, you may have more time and resource to create metadata. You could use specific metadata tools to help create and manage your metadata. If you are doing a small, solo project, you may not have the capacity to create extensive metadata or the access to metadata tools. In this scenario, it's important to prioritise the high value metadata for your research that support the aims of your project.


**One-off or repeated study...** 
- Is it a one-off study or a repeated study?
- If it is a repeated study, have there already been completed studies? What will the upcoming studies cover?

=== "Repeated study"
    If you are creating metadata for a repeated study, it is important to consider what metadata was captured for previous studies, including what schemas or standards were used. You should incoporate previous metadata structures into the metadata creation for any new research in the series in order to make sure your data is interoperable. If it's the first study of a series, it's important to create a robust metadata schema that can be reused for future studies.

=== "One-off study"
    For a one-off study, you have more felxibility about what metadata you create and/or what schema you use as it only needs to serve the aims of that individual project. However, it is still important to consider how you can make your (meta)data interoperable with other research projects in your field.
  

**Metadata standards and schemas...** 
- What common metadata standards are used in your discipline?
- What metadata schemas are widely available?
- Are you planning to deposit your (meta)data in a data repository and/or data catalogue? Do they provide a schema?

    === "Data repositories and catologues schemas"
  
        If you're depositing your (meta)data on data catalogues or data repositories, they may specify what metadata standards and controlled vocabularies to use. They may provide guidance or a metadata template/model, for example...

        - [CESSDA Data Model]( https://www.cessda.eu/Training/Training-Resources/Resource-crd-2592) maps out the required metadata elements needed to deposit a dataset in their data cataologue</ul>li>
        - [UK Data Service](https://ukdataservice.ac.uk/help/deposit-data/prepare-your-data-for-deposit/) gives guidance on how to prepare your metadata and documentation</li>

        Even if you're not planning to deposit your data in a repository or catalogue, they can provide easy-to-acess guidance on what metadata elements to capture and a ready made structure. You can download their metadata templates and models to use as a basis for your metadata creation.

=== "Metadata standards and schemas"

    It is good practice to identify common guidelines around metadata creation in your discipline or for a specific resource you are creating metadata for. This includes identifying widely used metadata standards and/or schemas. These can either provide the strucutre for your metadata creation or inform the approach you will take.

    **Standards for a large research project with shared data**

    Using a metadata schema and standard is essential when you are planning to share your (meta)data and reposit your research in a repository and/or catalogue. Scehmas and standards ensure that your (meta)data is interoperable and can be integrated into larger centralised systems (such as repositories and catalogues). Moreover, if you're working on larger project alongside multiple researchers, schemas and standards are great way to standardise the language you use internally, reducing the risk of confusion and miscommnuication.

    **Using metadata standards for a small research project where data is not shared**
Even if you're not planning to share your (meta)data, metadata standards and schemas will save you time in choosing what metadata elements to capture and what structure to follow. While you don't have to follow the metadata standard or schema in it's entirety, you can use it as a basis for your metadata creation. This will help you organise your metadata in a consistent way. For example, they can also provide definitions for metadata elements, valid inputs for metadata fields and controlled vocabularies so your metadata is clear and consistent. 

    While there are a few cross-discipline standards and schemas, they are mostly discipline specific. If you're planning to use a standard, it's best to identify the one you want to use before you start creating any metadata.

    You can refer to a list of common standards for different disciplines provided by the [University of Texas at Austin here](https://guides.lib.utexas.edu/metadata-basics/domain-standards). You could also use the [metadata standard catalogue](https://rdamsc.bath.ac.uk/search) to search available standards.

    For more information about standards, take a look at unit 2.6 of the Introduction course.

---

## How to create metadata

### What software should you use to create metadata?

There's no singular software you should use to create and manage metadata. You can use any software that generates and supports machine readable formats. You may then export your metadata into text based formats such as PDF, in order to create further documentation but the original file must be **machine readable** (for example, CSV, XML, SAV, XLS, JSON, RDF, SHP).

There are also tools to help make metadata creation and management easier and more efficient. These tools can be particularly useful if you're doing a large project and need to capture extensive metadata. Metadata tools can provide different different functionalities, for example: metadata management, quality review or repository compliance checkers. Depending on your needs, you may want to use more than one tool in your metadata management.

**Metadata tools include...** 
  - Online tools:
    - [Dublin Core Generator](https://nsteffel.github.io/dublin_core_generator/index.html)
  - Free open source software:
    - [Collectica for Excel (standard)](https://www.colectica.com/software/colecticaforexcel/)
    - [OpenRefine](https://openrefine.org/)
  - Commercial software:
    - [Collectica for Excel (advanced packages), questionnaire, designer](https://www.colectica.com/software/)
   
**You can further explore useful metadata tools here ...** 

- DCC provide a [list of metadata tools you can explore](https://www.dcc.ac.uk/guidance/standards/metadata/tools)
- UK Data service provide a [list of tools that can be used to explore and document data](https://ukdataservice.ac.uk/help/exploring-data/uk-data-service-online-tools-for-exploring-data/)

**Where to store metadata**

Depending on how you create your metadata, it can be stored in different locations. This includes ...
- in a spearate file alongside your data
- embedded in the data file

It is important to keep a record of where your metadata is stored so you can easily extract it when necessary.
