---
title: Unit 2.3 Variable metadata
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed
date: April 29, 2025
---

# Unit 2.3 Variable metadata

!!! example ""

    **Unit study time**
    2 hours

    **Intended Learning Outcome**
    By the end of the unit, you will ...

----

>[!NOTE]
>HM move to intro course

# Unit 2.3 Variable metadata

## What is a variable in tabular data?

Now we have looked at study level and dataset metadata, let's take a look at metadata for the data itself (also referred to as low level metadata). This metadata describes what type of data is included in a dataset. We will look at creating metadata for quantitative, tabular data.

In tabular data, data is stored in columns and rows. In this unit, we will look at how to create metadata about **variables**. First, we need to be able to identify what a variable is. 

Take a look at the tabular dataset. What are the variables in this dataset?

| f_n  | h   | b_d        | s    | m_s  | 
|------|-----|------------|------|------|
| John | 178 | 1998-09-02 | 1    | 3
| Gillian | 200 | 1979-06-12 | 2    | 2
| Alice| 182 | 1986-12-24 | 2    | 1
| Frederick | 168 | 2001-05-16 | 3    | 2
| Laura| 156 | 2011-03-05 | 2    | 1

<details>
<summary><b>The variables are...</b></summary>
<p></p>

- f_n
- h
- b_d
- m_s

Simply put, variables are the header of the columns in tabular data.

</details>

DDI (2021) Training Working Group 'Variables and the Variable Cascade' DDI (10.5281/zenodo.5180567)

---

## Defining variables

We use the term variable all the time, but what is it's definition?

>Variable is a characteristic of a unit being observed. A variable might be the answer of a question, have an administrative source, or be derived from other variables.[^1]

Examples of a variable could be ...
- Height
- Weight
- Age

In research, the data you collect about this variable is what makes up our datasets. For example ...
- Height: 1.73m, 1.45m, 1.67m
- Weight: 57kg, 69kg, 71kg
- Age: 29 years, 37 years, 64 years

You can collect variable data direct from research activity e.g. measuring someone with a tape measure, weighing someone with scales, asking someone to state their age in a survey. You can also derive data from other variable data. For example, you can calculate someone's BMI from the variable data collected for height, weight and age. This would make BMI a **derived variable**, as it is calculated through other variables.

>[!NOTE]
> BO - I haven't come across the term variable data before, I'd just say data, is this a widely used term?
> KR I came across variable data in my reading but I don't think it's necessarily a widely used term or a distinction that we need to make here so I have changed back to just 'data'

>[!NOTE]
>Note: CoData doesn't include definition for variable - will be in new terminology bank <br>
> BO - I think Sarah raised adding Variable to the codata glossary in the working group - is it in the latest version? Not sure if it's back from public review yet - Sarah?
>SW - public review is over for CODATA - awaiting finalised vocab

[^1]: Definition: https://rdf-vocabulary.ddialliance.org/discovery.html#variable-and-variable-definition<br>
UK Data Service: definition of a variable - A variable is an attribute that describes a person, place, thing, or idea. The value of the variable can "vary" from one entity to another.<br>

---
