---
title: Unit 2.6 Metadata documentation
author: 
date: April 29, 2025
---
## What you can do with your metadata

Once you have created high-quality structured metadata, you can produce useful data documentation such as Codebooks and Data Dictionaries.

These are files that sit alongside your dataset to give a robust overview of the study. It provides details about the study as well as the structure and content of the data. It may not include all the metadata you created, rather key elements that will enable people to quickly understand your dataset.

They can be generated in human readable formats (such as PDF) as well as machine readable formats (such as XML), and assists people in interpreting the data for replication and reuse.  

What metadata you include in a Codebook or Data Dictionary can be defined by the standard or schema you are using. 


---


If you're not using a standard or schema, you should have a look at other studies 

---
## Data Dictionaries and Codebooks


---
# Metadata Codebooks

A codebook is an accompanying document that sits alongside a dataset. It provides information about the complete dataset, including metadata about the study, data file(s), variables, categories, questions etc.


- View examples of [codebooks here](https://ddialliance.org/markup-examples)

::: 
notes
DDI Codebook: https://ddialliance.org/create-a-codebook
:::

---
## Data Dictionaries




---
## What should they include

The codebook may include a dataset’s record layout, list of 

variable names and labels, concepts, categories, cases, missing value codes, frequency counts, notes, universe statements


File Level information:


Variable/Question level information:

- Variable name: The name or number assigned to each variable in the data collection. These are often complex and mean nothing except to the researcher at the time of data collection. Some researchers prefer to use mnemonic abbreviations (e.g., EMPLOY1), while others use alphanumeric patterns (e.g., VAR001). For survey data, try to name variables after the question numbers - e.g., Q1, Q2b, etc.
  - Examples: H40-SF12-2, FLJ36031Y, DOB
- Variable label: A brief description to identify the variable for the user. Where possible, use the exact question or research wording.
    - Example: SF12 - ASSESSMENT OF R'S GENERAL HEALTH
- Variable meaning: outline the exact definition of the variable and if possible align it with existing vocabularies to increase interoperability amongst research data.
    - Example: Unified Medical Language System (UMLS)
- Question text: Where applicable, the exact wording from survey questions.
    - Example: In general, would you say your health is . . .
- Level of Measurement: the method the value was measured with
   - Examples: Nominal, ordinary, scale, ratio, interval, none (e.g. for qualitative variables)
- Values: The actual coded values in the data for this variable. Non-coded values, such as temperature readings, can just be input as they are and the researcher can skip the value labels (shown in next bullet point). 
   - Example: Likert scale  - 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, temperature reading - 100.4
- Value labels: The textual descriptions of the codes.
   - Example: Excellent, Very Good, Good, Fair, Poor
- Summary statistics: Where appropriate and depending on the type of variable, provide unweighted summary statistics for quick reference. For categorical variables, for instance, frequency counts showing the number of times a value occurs and the percentage of cases that value represents for the variable are appropriate. For continuous variables, minimum, maximum, and median values are relevant.
- Missing data: Where applicable, the values and labels of missing data. Missing data can bias an analysis and is important to convey in study documentation. Remember to describe all missing codes and differentiate between the types of missing data, including system missing, data instrument error, and participant skip question.
   - Example: Refusal (-1), Missing due to instrument calibration issue (-9)
 
  :::
  notes:
  https://guides.library.upenn.edu/c.php?g=564157&p=9554907
  :::
- Universe skip patterns: Where applicable, information about the population to which the variable refers, as well as the preceding and following variables.
   - Example: Default Next Question: H00035.00
- Dates and Times: the dates and times of the data collection. Be sure to indicate time zone. Standardize this by using the ISO 8601 international standard for time and date communication. 
   - Example: 2007-04-05T14:30-04:00
Notes: Additional notes, remarks, or comments that contextualize the information conveyed in the variable or relay special instructions. For measures or questions from copyrighted instruments, the notes field is the appropriate location to cite the source.
