
# Introduction To Metadata Course 

Welcome to the **Introduction to Metadata** training course.

## What will can I learn from this course?

By the time you've completed the course you will...
- Interpret and apply the principles of research data management and FAIR data
- Define what metadata is and its relationship to research data
- Explain the role of metadata in aiding discovery, understanding and reuse of data
- Identify how metadata is used throughout the research process
- Know how to use metadata to search data and metadata catalogues effectively
- Evaluate best practice in metadata creation and identify the features that make metadata high quality
- Understand the role of controlled vocabularies and metadata standards in metadata creation and management
- Create study level metadata for your own research

## Who's this course for?

This course is for anyone who will be engaging with research data as part of their work, for example using, analysing or collecting research data.

This course may be particularly relevant for ...
- Masters and PhD students
- Researchers 
- People working for funding bodies of academic research
- People working in policy areas that use data and academic research in their work

## What level of information do I need to know before starting the course?

You don't have to have any previous knowledge or training in metadata in order to do the Introduction course. As we will cover in the course, we use metadata in many areas of our lives already often without even realising it. So, even if this is the first time hearing the term, you have most likely engaged with metadata already.

You may already know about metadata and have done some training. This course aims to solidify knowledge around key concepts of metadata.

## How do I take the course?

The Introduction course is split into 10 units. These are...
- [**1.1 Research data**](<1.1 Research data.md>) - 1 hour
- [**1.2 Research data management**](<1.2 Research data management.md>) - 1 hour
- [**1.3 FAIR**](<1.3 FAIR.md>) - 1 hour
- [**2.1 Introduction to metadata**](<2.1 Introduction to metadata.md>) - 2 hours
- [**2.2 Metadata in the research lifecycle**](<2.2 Metadata in the research lifecycle.md>)- 1 hour
- [**2.3 Controlled vocabularies**](<2.3 Controlled vocabularies.md>) - 1.5 hours
- [**2.4 Metadata standards**](<2.4 Metadata standards.md>) - 2 hours
- [**2.5 Creating metadata: study level**](<2.5 Creating metadata: study level.md>) - 2 hours
- [**2.6 Using metadata: discover and understand data**](<2.6 Using metadata: discover and understand data.md>) - 1.5 hours
- [**2.7 Introduction Summary**](<2.7 Introduction Summary.md>) - 30 minutes

If this your first time engaging with metadata, we recommend working through the units chronologically so you can build on your understanding.

If you already have a strong understanding of metadata and are already working it in your research practice, you may only want to dip in and out of units to refresh your understanding or address any gaps in your current knowledge.

If you are already working with metadata or have completed training in metadata before, it's important to note that some terms may be used differently by people and/or disciplines. The way some concepts are defined in this course may also be different to how you currently understand them.

So we can give , we'll define key terms and concepts as we go along. You can refer to the definitions in the course glossary.

>[!NOTE]
> Should we include a glossary for the course?
> HM - I don't have a strong opinion on this, but I can see it being benfical as a quick reference/resource. Might be important becuase of the range of audience. If we want to link the words in the text, then we could link to existing glossaries e.g. the CLOSER Learning Hub or CODATA Research Data Management Terminology?<br>
> Is it worth flagging in the intro that this course mainly focuses on using metadata? It might be useful in distinguishing between this and the foundation. 


