---
title: Unit 1.3 FAIR Data principles
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Hayley Mills, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed
date: March 30, 2025
---

## Intended learning outcome

- Define the FAIR principles
- Understand the importance of FAIR in research
- Understand how to implement the FAIR principles 

---

## Outline
- Introduction to the FAIR principles 
- How to implement FAIR 
- Importance and benefits of FAIR data
- Assess how FAIR your data is

---

## FAIR data principles

An important principle to underpin any data management approach is the FAIR data principles.

---

## What is FAIR?

You might have heard about FAIR before, or this might be the first time you're coming across the principles. 

Here is a short video to give an overview of what FAIR data is in research.

[FAIR Data Video](https://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=what+is+research+data)

---

## What is FAIR? 

- **F**indable
- **A**ccessible
- **I**nteroperable
- **R**e-usable

What can we do to enact these principles?

>[!NOTE]
>**BO - do we want to say "as researchers", if the audience also includes data managers and funders? We could say "What can we do to enact these principles?" and have some examples for researchers and others for data managers? Or if they're the same there's no need to specify** <P></p>
> :large_blue_diamond: KR Great point re different audiences. When referring to 'other researchers' finding data, should I generalise that to 'other people' so to capture that it might be researchers, funders, policy makers etc.

::: notes
[Go FAIR Principles](https://www.go-fair.org/fair-principles/)
[Open University FAIR](https://university.open.ac.uk/library-research-support/research-data-management/fair-principles)
[FAIRAire](https://www.openaire.eu/how-to-make-your-data-fair)

:::
---

## **F**indable

**Findable**: other people can easily find data manually and by machine.

- What you can do:
  - Link your publications/data 
    - [How to Cite Datasets and Link to Publications DDC Guide](https://www.dcc.ac.uk/guidance/how-guides/cite-datasets)
  - Create a DOI for your data
  - Cite the data that you have used using a DOI
  - Create a Persistent Idenditifier (PID) for yourself
  - Deposit your data in an trusted repository/archive
     - [Where to keep research data - DDC guide](https://www.dcc.ac.uk/guidance/how-guides/where-keep-research-data)
  - **Create rich machine-readable metadata**  :triangular_flag_on_post:

::: notes

Whyte, A. (2015). ‘Where to keep research data: DCC checklist for evaluating data repositories’ v.1.1 Edinburgh: Digital Curation Centre. Available online: www.dcc.ac.uk/resources/how-guides

:::
---

## **A**ccessible

**Accessible**: other people can clearly understand how to access your data. Note, this does not mean data has to be 'open'. Even when data is restricted, rich metadata should be available in order for other people to know what your data is descibing and what data sharing policies are in place. FAIR states data should be _'as open as possible, as closed as necessary'._

>[!NOTE]
>**BO - Suggest changing "external researchers" to "other researchers", so it's not confused with just researchers outside of your organisation.**

- What you can do:
  - Use technology and software that is readily available and widely used in your discipline so people are able to access your data easily, if required
    - The best format for your data depends on the type of data you have collected
  - Provide your data to repositories in their preferred format, this can be found on their webpages
  - **Create rich machine-readable metadata**  :triangular_flag_on_post:
 
>[!NOTE]
>**BO - What is "standardised technology"? Can we give some examples of technologies and software?** <p> </p>
> :large_blue_diamond: KR I've expanded on that point to unpack 'standardised technology'. Not sure whether we are able to recommend specific technology/software or if we could recommend a framework/criteria to identify what technology/software is a good one to pick - e.g. latest version of software, look for recommendations from a certain body)

::: notes
:::

---

## **I**nteroperable

**Interoperable**: data should be easily integrated and combined with other datasets.

  - What you can do:
    - Ensure your data is clean and well structured, identifying and correcting any input or format errors
    - **Create rich metadata** :triangular_flag_on_post: that complies with relevant metadata standards and schemas
    - Use tools to standardise your data documentation such as controlled vocabularies, classifications, ontologies (these tools will be covered in unit 2.4)
   
>[!NOTE]
>**BO - We haven't covered standards, schemas, vocabs, classifications, or ontologies yet, so can we explain this more or say it will be explained more later on?** <p> </p>
> :large_blue_diamond: KR Great point. I will go through the training and when we mention things that we will discuss in later units, I'll add a note and link it to the unit so people can jump to relevant sections if they want.

::: notes
 - e.g. Controlled Vocabularies for mode of collection [11]
 - e.g. Survey responses Office for National statistics ethnic group classification [12]
:::

---

## **R**e-usable

**Re-usable**: data should be available for future research, study and processing, for example secondary research and cross-study research.

- **Create rich metadata** :triangular_flag_on_post: to provide context and describe the contents of your data
- Use terms that are used widely in your discipline and/or standardised by an academic community in a formal vocabulary (more information about standardisation tools such as controlled vocabularies and metadata stndards in unit 2.4 and unit 2.5)
- Select a clear data usage and sharing license

>[!NOTE]
>**BO - Same as above re: standardised terms - needs more explanation.** <p> </p>
> :large_blue_diamond: KR I've tried reframing, let me know if you feel that reads better.

::: notes
:::

---

## Benefits of FAIR for your data

Maximises the value and usefulness of your data

Instead of letting data sit on hardrive after publication, **FAIR enables data to go further**. People can find, re-use and cite datasets, increasing the impact a single research project. This allows data to not only serve it's original research purpose, but contribute to other enquiries from research projects to policy briefings. For researchers, their visibility is increased as their data reaches more people and is cited more widely.

Ensures long-term preservation and reusability of your data

By encouraging good documentation, standard formats, and reliable storage, FAIR enables your data to outlive your individual project. This means even years down the line, someone can still discover your research, understand it, and use it. It’s a bit like leaving a clear, well-labeled recipe behind instead of a messy list of ingredients.

Enables secondary research and cross-study comparison

Through standardising the terms we use to describe and structure our data, FAIR helps other researchers make sense of your data so they can form new enquiries. With robust documentation, FAIR allows people to focus on your dataset as a whole or certain sections of it, opening up a range of research possibilities. This enables data to go further and reduces the risk of wasting resources re-doing the same research.

FAIR also allows us to directly compare different datasets. This enables people to 

Speeds up the progress of research and improves efficiency

Through providing a strong set of guidelines, FAIR improves efficiency of internal research data management, allowing people within a research group to collaborate and manage data effectively. By having a clear track record of the data collected and where it's stored, you avoid the risk of duplicating research or hunting down missing datasets. Moreover, if you need to produce reports about your research process, all the information is ready to go as strong data documentation is created throughout the lifecycle of the project. This saves you the challenge of having to unpick your processes and document data retrospectively at the end of a project.

Easier for others to find your data

By recommending the use of persistent identifiers and clear metadata, FAIR ensures your research can be findable by search engines. Depositing data in relevant open repositories further enables your data to be efficiently located by people who are interested in your particular area of study. This increases the visibility of your work and helps ensure your data doesn’t just exist, it gets used.

::: notes
:::

---

## Case studies of FAIR data

FAIR case studies: Good practice of FAIR data and software
•	https://www.sheffield.ac.uk/openresearch/faircasestudies

---

## The importance of FAIR important for research

Instead of letting data sit on hardrive after publication, **FAIR enables data to go further**. People can find, re-use and cite datasets, increasing the impact a single research project. This allows data to not only serve it's original research purpose, but contribute to other enquiries from research projects to policy briefings. For researchers, their visibility is increased as their data reaches more people and is cited more widely.

Through structured research data management and clear documentation, **FAIR improves the quality of data and the accruacy of research results**. It provides proof of transparent and valid conduct, providing people with confidence in data and research. FAIR builds trust, fosters collaboration, and strengthens the credibility of research findings.

These benefits are some of the many reasons FAIR is increasingly requried by funders and scientific journals. 

>[!NOTE]
>**BO - We'll need to make sure the notes have more explanation, as when people read things like "Improves the quality of your data" I think they'll be thinking "How?" or "Why?". I think this applies to any time in this course where we're bullet-point listing the benefits of something** <p> </p>
> KR - Parking this here (could be used as a subheader : The FAIR principles are key in improving the quality and impact of your data. <p> </p>
> KR - Does this repeat the slide before about the Benefits of FAIR? Maybe we could turn this into an exercise so we're not repeating the same benefits 

::: notes
:::

---

## FAIR Data assessment list

If you have a dataset, use the [ARDS online FAIR dataset assessment tool](https://ardc.edu.au/resource/fair-data-self-assessment-tool/) to determine how FAIR your data is.

>[!NOTE]
>**Should this activity come later as it references/asks questions about a person's metadata level? Or could do the test now and ask participants to do it again after the course?**
>**BO - I think later to have a better understanding of the questions.**

::: notes 
[FAIRAire](https://www.openaire.eu/how-to-make-your-data-fair) -- has checklist
Jones, S. & Grootveld, M. (2017, November). How FAIR are your data? Zenodo. http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1065991

:::

---

## FAIR in action

If you are currently working on a dataset, you can practice FAIR now by completing the following tasks ...

- **Findable**
  - You can use [this guide from OpenAIRE](https://www.openaire.eu/find-trustworthy-data-repository) to find a trusted repository that is best suited for your data
  - Create a Persistent Idenfitier for yourself with [Orchid ID](https://orcid.org/)
    
- **Accessible**:
  - Using [this guide from UK Data Service](https://ukdataservice.ac.uk/learning-hub/research-data-management/format-your-data/recommended-formats/), determine which is the best file format for your data
    
- **Interoperable**
  - Use the open source tools [Open Data Editor]((https://opendataeditor.okfn.org/) or [OpenRefine](https://openrefine.org/) to clean your dataset, making sure errors are identified and corrected and the dataset is structured effectively 

- **R**e-usable 
   - Use [Creative Commons Guidance](https://creativecommons.org/share-your-work/cclicenses/) and their [License chooser tool](https://chooser-beta.creativecommons.org/) to find data sharing license best suited for your research

>[!NOTE]
>**Is there an interoperable task that doesn't involve metadata tools directly? We will covering controlled vocabularies later so it may be better to move that activity till later, once the concept has been explained**
> OLD Interpoerable task: Using [BARTOC's controlled vocabularies search tool](https://bartoc.org/), find the controlled vocabulary most relevant for your data
>**BO - I really like this activity but agree it might be better to move it later on after they've been introduced to repos and CVs etc.**

---

## What recurring feature that helped implement FAIR Principles wasn't covered in the practice tasks? 

Metadata!
- Documenting your data through creating rich metadata is one of the most effective ways of implementing the FAIR principles in your research
- In modules 2 and 3, we will explore what metadata is, when to create it, how to create it and best practice for its use

---

## FAIR unit summary

- **F**indable, **A**ccessible, **I**nteroperable, **R**e-usable
- Aims to optimise and make reuse of data easier
- Infrastructures are best placed to implement FAIR for the benefit of users
- Data producers and users need to contribute to create FAIR data

>[!NOTE]
>**BO - Do we say the second point before the summary? If not we should, as the summary should include key points from the previous content.**

---
## Further FAIR resources and training

Resources
- [GO FAIR Principles](https://www.go-fair.org/fair-principles/)
- 

Training 
- https://au-research.github.io/FAIR-data-101-training/
- [MANTRA FAIR sharing and access training](https://mantra.ed.ac.uk/fairsharingandaccess/)
- [University of Oxford FAIR in 60 seconds](https://portal.sds.ox.ac.uk/articles/media/Data_tips_FAIR_principles_in_60_seconds/28323506?file=52119107)

---

## Test your knowledge

Fair data is open data? (T/F)

I can make my data FAIR without capturing metadata for my study. (T/F)

>[!NOTE]
>**Add more T/F statements around FAIR datad**

---

## Old content

- Helps demonstrate the impact of research when people re-use and cite your dataset, so you get credit for all your outputs
- Scientific journals and funders now require scientists to share data
- Increases your visibility as a researcher
- Improves the quality of your data and accuracy of your research results
- Provides proof of transparent and valid conduct
- Improves our confidence in data and research

