---
title: Unit 2.2 Metadata in reseach
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Hayley Mills, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed
date: April 01, 2025
---

## Intended learning outcomes

- Understand what metadata describes in research projects
- Know who is responsible for createing metadata
- Know when to create metadata

>[!NOTE]
> BO - Not sure about the wording of the first one. I think the last one is an objective rather than ILO "Challenge common misconceptions of metadata creation in research".

---

## Outline

- Metadata terms 
- Levels of metadata
- Different types of metadata
- Different ways metadata is created
- Roles in metadata creation
- How much metadata you need to create
- Metadata creation myths

---

## Metadata in different contexts

Metadata can be used in many different contexts, industries and disciplines. 

Think about the different places you may have come across metadata before? Can you think of ways it can be used in different industries? How might it be used?

<details>
<summary><b>Click here to see some examples of how metadata might be used in different industries</b></summary>
<p></p> 

Metadata might be used by...
- Coporate businesses e.g. to manage HR records and/or company files
- Retail shops e.g. to record and organise stock
- TV streaming platforms e.g. to describe and categorise programmes
- Cameras e.g. to capture location/time of photo, light exposure
- Fitness trackers e.g. to track and analyse health data 
- Research e.g. to document and organise research data

</details>

In this course we are specifically looking at metadata to describe research data, understanding what the role of metadata is within a research project.

>[!NOTE]
>:large_blue_diamond: KR Is this a confusing point to add?

---

## Metadata in research

**Metadata can be created for any research project.** <p></p>
As research doesn't exist in a void, for every project, you will be able to capture information about the context of the research, e.g. who completed it, where it was conducted, when it was carried out, what it was about and why.

The more metadata a research project has, the more discoverable, accessible and (re)usable it is. While it may be percieved as something only large research projects need to create, even a small one-off project will benefit from having strong metadata.

However your resesources and how widely you want to share your data will determine what and how much metadata you create. In the Foundation Course, we will delve deeper into what metadata elements you could capture depending on you project size and aims. In this unit, we will look at the different roles metadata can play in research.

Later in the Introduction course in unit 2.5 and 2.6, we will also cover tools can be used in metadata creation and management that will help you maximise the use of metadata in research.

So, how is metadata created for research projects?nMetadata is either automatically generated by machines or manually created by people.

**Automatically generated**
  - Metadata software. For example: (This metadata stills needs to be verified by data managers and/or researchers)
    
**Maunually created**
- Metadata is created by people involved in a research project, such as researchers and data managers. There may be differe roles in metadata creation and management, for example, someone who creates the metadata and someone who quality assures the metadata created.


>[!NOTE]
>:large_blue_diamond: Should we include the common types of data metadata is used for? The points for that is included below:
> - Data is captured through a measurement e.g. blood pressure <br>
> - Data is recorded through a question in a survey or census, or as part of an administrative process <br>
> - Data captured through a device e.g. a location <br>
>:large_blue_diamond: KR If we do want to include the above, can we give example about the measurements collected in blood pressure as well as examples for the second and third ones.

>[!NOTE]
>This section needs reviewing. Want to describe how metadata applies to all forms of data however, describing tabular data is more straightforward (and will be the thing we focus on) <br>
>Are the bullet points helpful? Is the last bullet point about processing resources into numbers helpful or confusing? <br>
>:large_orange_diamond: Discuss 23rd July

>[!NOTE]
>BO - I would structure this as 1: The first three sentences. 2: Examples of metadata for non-tabular data. 3: Example of metadata for tabular data, then say this is what the rest of the course will focus on. I think we should define tabular data in this section too.<br>
>:large_blue_diamond: KR Agree. Done - mark as complete?

>[!NOTE]
> BO - The point [about metadata automatically generated/creators] feels a bit vauge, like who should check it? Collaborators working on a project? Another researcher? Is there someone external who can do this? I'm also not sure if the point is needed.

>[!NOTE]
>Add examples of software <br>
>Web survey data (automatically generated) <br>
>Image files (give location, time stamp) <br>
>Automatically generated: Fitbits, health trackers, glucose monitors // blood pressure machine (requires manual record of result)


---

## Organising metadata

The world of metadata is expansive. Some people find it useful to organise metadata so they can make sure they know what metadata to use and create.

Two common ways that metadata is organised is by **levels** or by **types**. These are not exhaustive classification systems, they are used as a guide or short-hand to talk about different groups of metadata elements that have a common purpose in what they're describing.

As they are used across research disciplines, we'll take a look at these two different ways of organising metadata.

---

## Levels of metadata

The different levels of metadata refer to the scope and detail of certain metadata elements. For example, high level metadata describes the overall context of a project (this may also be referred to as project level metadata). Whereas low level describes the project in more granular detail, capturing information about the type of data the project collected (this may be called data level metadata). Medium level metadata is somewhere between the two, describing assets such as datasets or questionnaires.

### High level (project)
Describes the research project or study, providing an overall picture of the entire research project. For example who conducted the research, who funded it, what was the focus of the research, why was the research carried out, when was was the research carried out, and where was it conducted. As we explored in the previous unit 2.1, porject level metadata can be considered the Who, What, Where, When, Why and How of data (WWWWH).

Can you think of metadata elements for high level metadata?

<details>
<summary><b>High level metadata element examples</b></summary>
<p></p>
  
- Research project title
- Abstract
- Principal Investigator
- Funding body

</details>

### Medium level (dataset or questionnaires)
Describes a specific dataset that was collected or created as part of the research project. This is the mid-level detail that helps users understand how a particular dataset was produced and how it should be used.

Can you think of metadata elements for medium level metadata?

<details>
<summary><b>Medium level metadata element examples</b></summary>
<p></p>
- Dataset title
- Creator of the dataset
- Format of the dataset
- Date the dataset was published
- Methodology used to collect data

</details>

### Low level (data)
Describes individual items within datasets or questionnaries. This could be a variable, question or image. The type of data a research project collects will inform what item metadata can be captured. For example, the information you can capture about a tabular dataset is not the same as information you can capture for images or sounds. A tabular dataset refers to data arranged in rows and columns. This data can be collected in different ways.For these datasets, metadata can capture information about the different columns, describing what data they hold. 

For data that doesn't originally sit in tabular format, for example text, images and sounds, you may need to process the resources into ‘numbers’ for statistical analysis. For example, for sounds, you may wish to record information about the length, the volume or the quality of the sound. The Introduction and Foundation course will focus on metadata for tabular datasets.

Can you think of metadata elements for low level metadata?

<details>
<summary><b>Low level metadata element examples</b></summary>
<p></p>

Low level metadata element examples:
- Name of the data item
- Description of the data item
- Unit of measurement of data item

</details>

The level of metadata that is available will influence how understandable a dataset is to other people.

Why do you think it is important that a research project both high level metadata for a research project as well as low level metdata?

What challenges would we come across if we only had low level metadata and not high level metadata for project?

<details>
<summary><b>Levels of metadata in research</b></summary>
<p></p>

Thinking back to the previous unit 2.1, if you only have high level metadata, it's hard to assess whether you want to access a dataset as you don't know what it contains. Equally if you only have low level metadata, you might not know when, where or how the research was conducted.

</details>

>[!NOTE]
> BO - I've rephrased this slightly to fit the tone.<br>
> BO - Can we add a couple of examples? I think that was helpful for the point above. <br>
> BO - Instead of "dataset-specific files" can we just say "datasets"? Can we also provide a few examples e.g. variable name, variable label, missing/invalid cases, summary statistics.
> :large_blue_diamond: Added, have avoided variable
> :large_orange_diamond: Should we use item level or variable level - discuss 23rd July.

>[!NOTE]
> BO - re **Project level**: I can't remember if you've said this before or if it comes later, but you could link the above to the WWWWWH of metadata. That's how I think of high-level/study-level metadata - it's about answering those questions.
> :large_blue_diamond: Agree. Have added, mark as complete?

>[!NOTE]
> BO - Re: your notes above, I think we could add a point to say the level of metadata you create will influence how understandable your dataset is to other people i.e. if you only have high-level metadata, that might be less helpful than knowing exactly what questions were asked or how many missing cases there are on a particular variable. <br>
> :large_blue_diamond: KR agree, have added. Mark as complete? <p></p>
> BO - The level of metadata created also depends on where the data will be deposited e.g. some data catalogues may only require you to briefly describe your sample and the types of data collected - we can say repos will be covered in more detail later.<br>
> :large_blue_diamond: We cover this in more detail in unit 2.4. My only worry about including it here is that it will be confusing as we're not specifically talking to this audience as metadata creators (it will include metadata users as well). To discuss further.

>[!NOTE]
> BO - I think study or project are fine, but we should probably be consistent throughout. I personally would say "research project" rather than "research study", but I don't think there's a right or wrong. Also might be confusing because when I'm talking about high-level metadata I use that interchangebly with "study-level"...<br>
> :large_blue_diamond: KR, great - maybe suggest project level as that feels like it's more general and could be relatable to more disciplines?  **KR ENSURE THAT PROJECT LEVEL IS STANDARDISED AND MAKE NOTE OF PROJECT LEVEL AND HIGH LEVEL BEING USED ALONGSIDE EACH OTHER** <p></p>
>I would say "variable level" rather than "data level" or "item level", but in this context, the point you're making is that metadata can be high or low level, and that doesn't always have to relate to data. For example, question-level metadata is just as fine grained as variable-level metadata. So maybe we don't want to mention the specific type of metadata and we just say High-level, medium-level, low-level, or we say Study-level, dataset/questionnaire level, variable/question level? Or something else? <br>
> :large_blue_diamond: KR I was thinking about this - maybe we should stick to high, medium, low. I am leaning towards item at the moment as it can be interpreted by different disciplines (esp. as variable may mean different things in different disciplines and people might not always see as the thing they're working with as traditional 'data')

>[!NOTE]
> BO - Suggest rephrasing to "For example, the information you can capture about a tabular dataset is not the same as information you can capture for images or sounds." <br>
>:large_blue_diamond: KR Agree. Done - mark as complete?

---

## Different types of metadata

Another common way to organise metadata is through specifying different types of metadata. This is not mutually exclusive to the levels of metadata we just explored, it's just another way of looking at metadata. Instead of thinking about the level of detail the metadata is describing, it looks at metadata elements thematically.

Metadata types group different metadata elements together based on a common purpose in documentation. Below are some common types of metadata. 
_Note some metadata elements may serve multiple purposes and can be included in multiple metadata types_

<details>
<summary><b>Structural</b></summary>
<p></p>
  
Structural metadata  indicates how compound objects are put together. Examples include how pages are ordered to form chapters; how data are organised in a table; how datasets are organised in a collection.
  - Structural metadata element examples: linked datasets, table of contents

</details>

<details>
<summary><b>Descriptive</b></summary>
<p></p>
  
Descriptive metadata describes a dataset or resource in such a way that people can discover and identify it. Contains information that aids with findability.
  - Descriptive metadata element examples: creator(s), affiliation(s), title, abstract, keywords, persistent identifier, related publications

</details>

<details>
<summary><b>Administrative</b></summary>
<p></p>
  
Administrative metadata used to manage administrative aspects of the digital objects such as intellectual property rights and acquisition. Also documents information concerning the creation, alteration, and version control of the metadata itself. This is sometimes known as meta-metadata.
  - Administrative metadata element examples: Access restrictions, Licensing, Copyright, Data management plan reference, Metadata version

</details>

<details>
<summary><b>Technical</b></summary>
<p></p>
  
Tecnical metadata is information describing the technical processes used to produce, or required to use a digital object.
  - Technical metadata element examples: File format, Software required, File size

</details>

<details>
<summary><b>Provenance</b></summary>
<p></p>
Provenance metadata is information concerning the creation, attribution, or version history of managed data. Provenance metadata indicates the relationship between two versions of data objects and is generated whenever a new version of a dataset is created. Provenance information is gathered along the data lifecycle as part of curation processes. We will go more in-depth into provenance metadata in the next unit 2.3.
  - Provenance metadata element examples: Date of data collection, Method of data collection, Version history of data
 
</details>

What types of metadata do you think a research project create and share?

<details>
<summary><b>Types of metadata in research</b></summary>
<p></p>

Like the different levels of metadata, it's important to include different types of metadata for a research project. For example, if you reviewed a project's descriptive and structural metadata and you decided you wanted to access data but the project had no administrative metadata, you would struggle know how or where to access the data.

</details>

>[!NOTE]
>Is this required? What is the need/purpose of these classifications for audience member of training? Should we point towards another resource that will explain it. <br>
>Please could we check examples for metadata elements. Are these the best examples to give <br>
> BO - I don't know if it's needed. Maybe we could even add it to foundation, as I think we're just introducing basic ideas and definitions in this course, so it might be too detailed/not necessary for this audience? <br>
> :large_orange_diamond: Discuss 23rd July

::
Codata definitions for metadata types - RDM terminology 2023
:::

---

## Identifying different types of metadata

Let's take a look at the metadata for the [National Child Development Study](https://discovery.closer.ac.uk/item/uk.cls.ncds/524c8f92-493f-4660-90c4-0aa7ac3d2640) (which includes the [Age 7 Survey (1965)](https://discovery.closer.ac.uk/item/uk.cls.ncds/0103e4b4-09a6-41a8-997b-3ca0b1edcafc) we looked at in unit 2.1.

What are the different levels of metadata you can identify? Try find three metadata elements for each level of metadata, High, Medium and Low. 

What different types of metadata can you identify? Try find one metadata element for each type of metadata.

<details>
<summary><b>Levels of metadata answer</b></summary>
<p></p>

**High**

**Medium** 

**Low**

</details>

<details>
<summary><b>Types of metadata answer</b></summary>
<p></p>

**Structural**

**Descriptive** 

**Administrative**

**Technical**

**Provenance**

</details>

>[!NOTE]
> Could also provide screenshots where they pick out different type of metadata.
> BO - good idea!

---

## When is metadata created?

Metadata can be created at any time during the research project. Metadata that is captured as the research is happening is referred to upstream or prospective metadata collection whereas metadata created or data that already exists is called downstream or retrospective metadata collection.

<details>
<summary><b>Upstream metadata creation (prospective)</b></summary>
<p></p>

Upstream or prospective metadata creation refers to metadata that is created at the time of content or data creation. This is also referred to as upstream metadata creation and is captured early to support efficient organisation, discovery, and reuse.

For example:
- A scientist tagging a dataset with metadata (e.g. author, location, method) before submitting it to a repository
- A photographer adding EXIF data (camera type, date, location) to an image at the time the photo is taken (this may also be automatically generated by the camera)
- A librarian cataloging a book upon acquisition 
- A researcher capturing metadata using 

Ways you can implement upstream metadata creation:
- Embed metadata creation into workflows and data collection processes (e.g. surveys, forms, templates)
- Automate metadata capture (e.g. software logs. Some web surveys and online tools can also enable you to automatically capture metadata as you collect the data)
  
</details>

<details>
<summary><b>Downstream metadata creation (retrospective)</b></summary>
<p></p>

Downstream or retrospective metadata is created after the data/content has already been created or collected and retrofits structure and meaning onto existing content. This is typically done for archival, discovery, or compliance purposes.
This may be because this data was not adequately described at the time of creation or data creators decide they want to deposit their data in a data repository or catalogue after they have collected the data and now need to comply to their metadata requirements.

Examples:
- Archivists describing historical documents their creation
- Adding keywords and subject tags to an existing collection of datasets, videos or images

Ways you can implement downstream metadata:
- When creating metadata retrospectively, it is important to document assumptions and gaps in the metadata provenance
- You can use AI tools to assist with large scale metadata generation (however the metadata created from this must be checked by a data manager or researcher)
- When retrospectively creating metadata, audit and prioritise content high-value metadata assets, choosing the metadata elements that will support your project aim

</details>

If you were considering creating metadata for your research project, which approach would you take? Why?

<details>
<summary><b>Downstream metadata creation (retrospective)</b></summary>
<p></p>

>[!NOTE]
>Web surveys - can create metadata at the point of survey creation - linking question metadata to variable metadata

---

## Myths around creating metadata for research projects

<details>
<summary><b>“I haven't been required to create metadata so for me, it's just optional admin work.”</b></summary>
<p></p>
Even if an organisation such as a funding body or data registry has not required you to create metadata, metadata promotes the FAIR principles, making research findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable. Without it, people don't know what a dataset is about and what it contains. This lack of transparency makes a dataset less trustworthy and consequently less useable.
</details>

<details>
<summary><b>“I’ll capture the metadata at the end of the project as my research data will be ready then.”</b></summary>
<p></p>
Creating metadata at the end of a research project can be a complicated and time consuming process. You may have to re-find information about data and data collection processes. People may forget important information or it could get lost. If you create and manage metadata as you go, you can capture crucial information as accurately and fully as possible. This also enables you to create your project's provenance which is important in making research trustworthy and transparent.
</details>

<details>
<summary><b>“Metadata is only for big datasets or labs.”</b></summary>
<p></p>
Even if you're working on an individual project and have a single dataset, metadata matters. It documents the process behind your data, so others (and your future self) can understand it later. 
</details>

<details>
<summary><b>“I know what my variables mean and they have a structured code, so everyone will understand them too.”</b></summary>
<p></p>
While V1_Res may seem like a logical code for "Response variable for phase 1", other people who do not know anything about your research or dataset may not. It is important to always explain acronyms, codes, units, and scale. You will save others time having to contact the research team for clarification. Also, while you may know what the code means now, in a few years it may not remember. Metadata can help your future self understand your data quickly and effectively.
</details>

<details>
<summary><b>“I don't have time to create metadata.”</b></summary>
<p></p>
While metadata requires some time investment during the research process, it saves a lot of time and confusion later. Creating metadata as you go along means you don't have to unpick your research process at the end. It also saves you having to reply to clarification request from people trying to understand your research as the information is a structured and clear format.
</details>

<details>
<summary><b>“I can’t share metadata because my data is restricted access.”</b></summary>
<p></p>
Sharing metadata does not mean sharing your raw data.  FAIR's principle of 'open as possible, closed as necessary' recognises that some data is required to be restricted. Metadata, however, is a useful way to describe what type of information your data captures without releasing any data. Moreover, if your research project contains some data that can be available and others need to be restricted access, you can use your metadata to record different security levels at the dataset or item level.
</details>


>[!NOTE]
> BO - I think there's some overlap with the FAIRwDDI FAQs here - we should check and if there's quite a bit of overlap maybe we could link to that document?

---

## Test your knowledge


---
