introduction/2.6 Creating metadata: study level.md, before:

---
title: Unit 2.6 Creating metadata, study level
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Hayley Mills, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed
date: April 09, 2025
---

# Unit 2.6 Creating metadata: study level

## Unit overview

### Unit study time
1.5 hours

### Intended Learning Outcomes

By the end of the unit, you will ...

- Understand who needs to create metadata and recognise their role in metadata creation
- Be familiar with how to create metadata about a research project and identify what metadata elements to caputre
- Know how to implement best practice (metadata standards and controlled vocabularies) in metadata creation 

### Outline

- Introduction to creating metadata 
- Creating metadata for a research project
- Overview of DublinCore and how to use the DublineCore Generator
- Metadata best practice tools in the DublinCore Advanced Generator

---

## Creating metadata

### How to approach metadata creation

In the earlier units, we looked at how we can use metadata in our research. To finish the Introduction course, we'll look at how we can go about creating metadata. 

Before we start creating metadata, we want to know what metadata to create.

<details>
<summary><b>What metadata should you create?</b></summary>
<p></p>

What metadata you choose to create depends on the aims of your research and what you want to do it. If your data is only for personal reference, your metadata might only need to capture key details that will be useful for your current and future work. However, if you’re planning to share your research more widely and/or deposit it on a data repository or catalogue, you’ll likely need to include more metadata to help others understand and use your data.

If you’re depositing your data on a data repository or catalgoue, they might require certain metadata. These platforms often provide a template or schema to follow, to help you ensure your metadata is interoperable with the other studies on the platform.

</details>

In this unit, we will look at creating study level metadata. Whether you're sharing your research or keeping it for personal reference, study-level metadata helps make sense of your work. It gives others a clear overview of what your research is about and how it was produced. It also helps you document your research in your files so you can revisit it at a later date.

<details>
<summary><b>What metadata elements might we want to include to describe a research study?</b></summary>
<p></p>

Metadata elements you could capture...

<ul>
<li>Title of study</li>
<li>Date the data was collected</li>
<li>Creator of the data</li>
<li>Location of the research</li>
<li>Format the data is stored in</li>
<li>Data access information</li>
</li>ul>
  
</details>


>[!NOTE]
> BO - The above looks like a recap of the previous units(?), so I'd add a sentence before "Who should create research project metadata?" to say something like "Before we start, let's recap some of the key learnings from the earlier units in this course", or something to show that it's a recap.
> BO - just seen that the below is also a recap, so maybe move tools to the above under the heading "How can we create metadata" or something similar to tie in with the who/what/where etc headings, or use the heading you've already got below. <br>
> HM - some of this is a bit repetitive and feels like it's asnwering the same question. Do we need the list of elements, or can we go with explaining how they decide what elements they need themselves based on who it is for/what it's used for/the data repsositry etc. If data archive for example - look this up first, so you know the minimum requirements, if a generic respostitry (e.g. figshare), then might want to use additional elements using exisiting standards etc. This is assuming were talking about all metadata from study to variable, but I think you are talking specifically about the high level here? We might need to make that clearer. 

---

### Creating metadata for a research project

As we explored in unit 2.5, it is useful to follow a metadata standard or schema when creating metadata. It saves us time of making our own metadata structure from scratch as it provide a list of redefined metadata elements and their valid inputs. It also helps us ensure our metadata is interoperable with other metadata that uses the standard.

A common cross-discipline standard that captures study level metadata is [Dublin Core](https://www.dublincore.org/about/) The standard can also be used to document a range of resources outside of a research space. 

The standard is expressed as a simple schema which contains 15 core elements. Depending on the resource you want to describe, some of the metadata elements may not be relevant. In these cases, you can adjust what metadata elements to include accordingly.

Dublin Core gives [definitions of the metadata elements](https://www.dublincore.org/specifications/dublin-core/usageguide/elements/) and guidance around what data to input into the metadata fields. These definitions are easy to find as each element has a link to the definition page. For example...
- For names they recommend to put family name then first name
- For dates, they recommend YYYY-MM-DD format
- [Explore more here](https://www.dublincore.org/specifications/dublin-core/usageguide/elements/)

>[!NOTE]
> BO - I'd reframe or cut down the above, as I think information about Dublin Core already is or should be included in the previous unit. In this unit, I think we should focus more on doing/implmentation rather than learning new information. So above, we could just say that we're going to have a go at creating some reserach project level metadata using Dublin Core, which we touched on in the previous unit - you could recap what Dublin Core is and what it allows you to document, but I think the bulk of the info should be in 2.6 and here we provide a short recap then go onto the metadata generator. 

---

## Dublin Core Simple Metadata Generator

While you can create Dublin Core metadata directly in any machine-readable format, Dublin Core also provides an online generator where you can write your metadata online and download it. 

**[Dublin Core Simple Generator](https://nsteffel.github.io/dublin_core_generator/generator_nq.html)**

Using the metadata generator, try creating metadata for the following research project ...

>'Connection to greenspaces in capital cities across the UK' conducted by Joe Smith and Mary Jones collects data on residents of capital cities across the UK and their feelings toward greenspaces. Face-to-face interviews were conducted in September 2022 - June 2023 (London, Cardiff, Edinburgh, Belfast). The project consists of 4 datasets, one for each city. The interviews used Greenspace Connection Survey v2.0. Green Brick Org provided logistical support for the interviews. The dataset is published by Green City Data in 08/09/25. The dataset is stored in CSV and conducted in English. The data is open access with CC BY-NC rights.
>_Note this is a fictional case study example for practice purposes only._

<details>
<summary><b>Dublin Core Generator: metadata example</b></summary>
<p></p> 

Through interpreting the information above, you could create the following metadata (or something similar)...

<img src="img/DCGen ex 3.png" alt="Alt Text" width="180" height="350"> 

After completing the information, you can select a machine readable format such as XML, HTML, or XHTML to generate and save your metadata.

<img src="img/DCGen ex 3 output.png" alt="Alt Text" width="180" height="350"> 

</details>

---

### Challenges of the Dublin Core Simple Metadata Generator

<b>What do you think some of the challenges could be around the metadata created by the simple generator?</b>

<details>
<summary>Challenges of Dublin Core Simple Metadata Generator</summary>
<p></p>

While there are some guidelines as to what to you can put in each metadata field, the simple generator does not refer to controlled vocabularies. This means metadata can be presented in different ways. This could decrease the quality of your metadata as well as it's interoperability. 

Additionally, while the metadata element definitions go some way to describing the sort of data you should be input into each metadata field, some elements are open to interpretation.

For example, in the 'Date' element could refer to:
<ul>
<li>Date the research was created</li>
<li>Date the metadata record was created</li>
<li>Date the data was published</li>
<li>Date data was submitted</li>
<li>Date data was last modified</li>
</ul>

For example, for the research project we just explored, we could interpret the same information to provide slightly different metadata ...

<img src="img/DCGen ex 3 diff.png" alt="Alt Text" width="180" height="350"> 

</details>

<p></p>

<b>How could we improve the quality of this metadata? What tools could we use?</b>

<details>
<summary>Metadata best practices we could implement</summary>
<p></p>

We could provide more specific metadata element titles or definitions so we know what type of data they include, for example, we could change 'Date' to 'Date Published'

For some metadata elements, controlled vocabularies can help ensure metadata is standardised and clear to understand. Thinking back to unit [2.4](<2.4 Controlled vocabularies.md>), what are some of the metadata elements in the Dublin Core Generator that could benefit from using controlled vocabularies?

For example...

<ul>
<li>Language</li>
<li>Subject</li>
<li>Date</li>
<li>Type</li>
<li>Format</li>
<li>Coverage</li>
</ul>

</details>

---

## Dublin Core Advanced Metadata Generator

Now explore the [Dublin Core Advanced Metadata Generator](https://nsteffel.github.io/dublin_core_generator/generator.html). 

What's the difference between the Simple Generator and Advanced Generator?
<p></p>
What feautres and tools does it include in order to improve the clarity and quality of the metadata?


**Clear metadata elements**

For some fields, the Advanced Generator provides a space to further specify the metadata element in order to avoid confusion...

<img src="img/DCdescription.png" alt="Alt Text" width="410" height="130"> 

<img src="img/DCdate.png" alt="Alt Text" width="380" height="210"> 

For example, by having 'Date Available' as a metadata element, rather than the generic term 'Date', it is easier to understand that the metadata is describing when the resource was made available for external use.

**Controlled vocabularies**

The Advanced Generator also provides a list of controlled vocabularies that you could use and gives the functionality to specify which one you choose for a metadata field...

<img src="img/DCresources.png" alt="Alt Text" width="150" height="400"> 

This helps you identify relevant controlled vocabularies, enabling you to make sure your metadata is consistent and interoperable (see [unit 2.5](<2.5 Controlled vocabularies.md>) for more information about controlled vocabularies)

**Extra metadata elements**

The Advanced Generator also includes seven further metadata elements:
<img src="img/DCAd Gen additions.png" alt="Alt Text" width="240" height="400"> 

Using these extra features, try re-creating the metadata for the example research project.



If you are currently working on a research project or have a resource you would like to create metadata for, try using the Dublin Core Metadata Advanced Generator.

>[!NOTE]
> **KR TO DO:** Provide the metadata for the example research project using advanced generator so people can check/cross-reference
> BO - I think this is a good way to end the course as hopefully they'll have something physical to show for it :) do we need a summary unit or section in this unit? Could even just be a couple of sentences to link it to the Foundation course.

Commit message:

Update 2.6 Creating metadata: study level.md
Added new note

introduction/2.6 Creating metadata: study level.md, after:

---
title: Unit 2.6 Creating metadata, study level
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Hayley Mills, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed
date: April 09, 2025
---

# Unit 2.6 Creating metadata: study level

## Unit overview

### Unit study time
1.5 hours

### Intended Learning Outcomes

By the end of the unit, you will ...

- Understand who needs to create metadata and recognise their role in metadata creation
- Be familiar with how to create metadata about a research project and identify what metadata elements to caputre
- Know how to implement best practice (metadata standards and controlled vocabularies) in metadata creation 

### Outline

- Introduction to creating metadata 
- Creating metadata for a research project
- Overview of DublinCore and how to use the DublineCore Generator
- Metadata best practice tools in the DublinCore Advanced Generator

>[!NOTE]
>HM would it be helpful to reiterate the benefits of creating metadata again here? e.g. Helps your future self and others reuse data, Avoids duplication and loss, Enables robust documentation, Supports repository and publication requirements
---

## Creating metadata

### How to approach metadata creation

In the earlier units, we looked at how we can use metadata in our research. To finish the Introduction course, we'll look at how we can go about creating metadata. 

Before we start creating metadata, we want to know what metadata to create.

<details>
<summary><b>What metadata should you create?</b></summary>
<p></p>

What metadata you choose to create depends on the aims of your research and what you want to do it. If your data is only for personal reference, your metadata might only need to capture key details that will be useful for your current and future work. However, if you’re planning to share your research more widely and/or deposit it on a data repository or catalogue, you’ll likely need to include more metadata to help others understand and use your data.

If you’re depositing your data on a data repository or catalgoue, they might require certain metadata. These platforms often provide a template or schema to follow, to help you ensure your metadata is interoperable with the other studies on the platform.

</details>

In this unit, we will look at creating study level metadata. Whether you're sharing your research or keeping it for personal reference, study-level metadata helps make sense of your work. It gives others a clear overview of what your research is about and how it was produced. It also helps you document your research in your files so you can revisit it at a later date.

<details>
<summary><b>What metadata elements might we want to include to describe a research study?</b></summary>
<p></p>

Metadata elements you could capture...

<ul>
<li>Title of study</li>
<li>Date the data was collected</li>
<li>Creator of the data</li>
<li>Location of the research</li>
<li>Format the data is stored in</li>
<li>Data access information</li>
</li>ul>
  
</details>


>[!NOTE]
> BO - The above looks like a recap of the previous units(?), so I'd add a sentence before "Who should create research project metadata?" to say something like "Before we start, let's recap some of the key learnings from the earlier units in this course", or something to show that it's a recap.
> BO - just seen that the below is also a recap, so maybe move tools to the above under the heading "How can we create metadata" or something similar to tie in with the who/what/where etc headings, or use the heading you've already got below. <br>
> HM - some of this is a bit repetitive and feels like it's asnwering the same question. Do we need the list of elements, or can we go with explaining how they decide what elements they need themselves based on who it is for/what it's used for/the data repsositry etc. If data archive for example - look this up first, so you know the minimum requirements, if a generic respostitry (e.g. figshare), then might want to use additional elements using exisiting standards etc. This is assuming were talking about all metadata from study to variable, but I think you are talking specifically about the high level here? We might need to make that clearer. 

---

### Creating metadata for a research project

As we explored in unit 2.5, it is useful to follow a metadata standard or schema when creating metadata. It saves us time of making our own metadata structure from scratch as it provide a list of redefined metadata elements and their valid inputs. It also helps us ensure our metadata is interoperable with other metadata that uses the standard.

A common cross-discipline standard that captures study level metadata is [Dublin Core](https://www.dublincore.org/about/) The standard can also be used to document a range of resources outside of a research space. 

The standard is expressed as a simple schema which contains 15 core elements. Depending on the resource you want to describe, some of the metadata elements may not be relevant. In these cases, you can adjust what metadata elements to include accordingly.

Dublin Core gives [definitions of the metadata elements](https://www.dublincore.org/specifications/dublin-core/usageguide/elements/) and guidance around what data to input into the metadata fields. These definitions are easy to find as each element has a link to the definition page. For example...
- For names they recommend to put family name then first name
- For dates, they recommend YYYY-MM-DD format
- [Explore more here](https://www.dublincore.org/specifications/dublin-core/usageguide/elements/)

>[!NOTE]
> BO - I'd reframe or cut down the above, as I think information about Dublin Core already is or should be included in the previous unit. In this unit, I think we should focus more on doing/implmentation rather than learning new information. So above, we could just say that we're going to have a go at creating some reserach project level metadata using Dublin Core, which we touched on in the previous unit - you could recap what Dublin Core is and what it allows you to document, but I think the bulk of the info should be in 2.6 and here we provide a short recap then go onto the metadata generator. 

---

## Dublin Core Simple Metadata Generator

While you can create Dublin Core metadata directly in any machine-readable format, Dublin Core also provides an online generator where you can write your metadata online and download it. 

**[Dublin Core Simple Generator](https://nsteffel.github.io/dublin_core_generator/generator_nq.html)**

Using the metadata generator, try creating metadata for the following research project ...

>'Connection to greenspaces in capital cities across the UK' conducted by Joe Smith and Mary Jones collects data on residents of capital cities across the UK and their feelings toward greenspaces. Face-to-face interviews were conducted in September 2022 - June 2023 (London, Cardiff, Edinburgh, Belfast). The project consists of 4 datasets, one for each city. The interviews used Greenspace Connection Survey v2.0. Green Brick Org provided logistical support for the interviews. The dataset is published by Green City Data in 08/09/25. The dataset is stored in CSV and conducted in English. The data is open access with CC BY-NC rights.
>_Note this is a fictional case study example for practice purposes only._

<details>
<summary><b>Dublin Core Generator: metadata example</b></summary>
<p></p> 

Through interpreting the information above, you could create the following metadata (or something similar)...

<img src="img/DCGen ex 3.png" alt="Alt Text" width="180" height="350"> 

After completing the information, you can select a machine readable format such as XML, HTML, or XHTML to generate and save your metadata.

<img src="img/DCGen ex 3 output.png" alt="Alt Text" width="180" height="350"> 

</details>

---

### Challenges of the Dublin Core Simple Metadata Generator

<b>What do you think some of the challenges could be around the metadata created by the simple generator?</b>

<details>
<summary>Challenges of Dublin Core Simple Metadata Generator</summary>
<p></p>

While there are some guidelines as to what to you can put in each metadata field, the simple generator does not refer to controlled vocabularies. This means metadata can be presented in different ways. This could decrease the quality of your metadata as well as it's interoperability. 

Additionally, while the metadata element definitions go some way to describing the sort of data you should be input into each metadata field, some elements are open to interpretation.

For example, in the 'Date' element could refer to:
<ul>
<li>Date the research was created</li>
<li>Date the metadata record was created</li>
<li>Date the data was published</li>
<li>Date data was submitted</li>
<li>Date data was last modified</li>
</ul>

For example, for the research project we just explored, we could interpret the same information to provide slightly different metadata ...

<img src="img/DCGen ex 3 diff.png" alt="Alt Text" width="180" height="350"> 

</details>

<p></p>

<b>How could we improve the quality of this metadata? What tools could we use?</b>

<details>
<summary>Metadata best practices we could implement</summary>
<p></p>

We could provide more specific metadata element titles or definitions so we know what type of data they include, for example, we could change 'Date' to 'Date Published'

For some metadata elements, controlled vocabularies can help ensure metadata is standardised and clear to understand. Thinking back to unit [2.4](<2.4 Controlled vocabularies.md>), what are some of the metadata elements in the Dublin Core Generator that could benefit from using controlled vocabularies?

For example...

<ul>
<li>Language</li>
<li>Subject</li>
<li>Date</li>
<li>Type</li>
<li>Format</li>
<li>Coverage</li>
</ul>

</details>

---

## Dublin Core Advanced Metadata Generator

Now explore the [Dublin Core Advanced Metadata Generator](https://nsteffel.github.io/dublin_core_generator/generator.html). 

What's the difference between the Simple Generator and Advanced Generator?
<p></p>
What feautres and tools does it include in order to improve the clarity and quality of the metadata?


**Clear metadata elements**

For some fields, the Advanced Generator provides a space to further specify the metadata element in order to avoid confusion...

<img src="img/DCdescription.png" alt="Alt Text" width="410" height="130"> 

<img src="img/DCdate.png" alt="Alt Text" width="380" height="210"> 

For example, by having 'Date Available' as a metadata element, rather than the generic term 'Date', it is easier to understand that the metadata is describing when the resource was made available for external use.

**Controlled vocabularies**

The Advanced Generator also provides a list of controlled vocabularies that you could use and gives the functionality to specify which one you choose for a metadata field...

<img src="img/DCresources.png" alt="Alt Text" width="150" height="400"> 

This helps you identify relevant controlled vocabularies, enabling you to make sure your metadata is consistent and interoperable (see [unit 2.5](<2.5 Controlled vocabularies.md>) for more information about controlled vocabularies)

**Extra metadata elements**

The Advanced Generator also includes seven further metadata elements:
<img src="img/DCAd Gen additions.png" alt="Alt Text" width="240" height="400"> 

Using these extra features, try re-creating the metadata for the example research project.



If you are currently working on a research project or have a resource you would like to create metadata for, try using the Dublin Core Metadata Advanced Generator.

>[!NOTE]
> **KR TO DO:** Provide the metadata for the example research project using advanced generator so people can check/cross-reference
> BO - I think this is a good way to end the course as hopefully they'll have something physical to show for it :) do we need a summary unit or section in this unit? Could even just be a couple of sentences to link it to the Foundation course.
