---
title: Unit 2.6 Metadata Standards
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Hayley Mills, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed
date: April 09, 2025
---
## Intended learning outcomes 

- Understand what metadata standards and schemas are
- Understand the role metadata standards and schemas play in metadata creation and management
- Know how to find and choose relevant metadata standards and schemas 

---

## Outline

- Overview of metadata standards and schemas
- The benefits of metadata standards and their role in FAIR
- How to find the right metadata standard for your data

---

## Metadata schemas and standards

Even within a research area, there may be different ways of saying the same thing. In the last unit 2.4, we looked at how controlled vocabularies can help standardise the terms used in our metadata so it becomes more interoperable and machine readable.

While controlled vocabularies focus more on the content of metadata fields, such as what information can be used within a certain metadata element, metadata schemas and standards offer a broader framework around how to structure metadata.

Metadata standards and schemas help us further implement metadata best practice, increasing the consistency, quality and utility of metadata. They provide a common language so that there is a shared understanding of how data and related information is described. Standardising metadata in this way enables sharing and comparing of data across studies.

Although the terms metadata schemas and standards are often used interchangeably, they are different. But how? 

>[!NOTE]
>Information drawn from DDIwFAIR - reference when available and link to resource

---

## Metadata standards

Metadata standards are similar to schemas however, they are larger in scope providing broader guildines around the content and structure of metadata. They act as a ready-made framework that predefine metadata elements and valid inputs, and they can also specify what controlled vocabularies to use. 

While schemas outline a specific set of metadata elements, standards define a large range of elements that may be relevant to a specific field or resource. It is then up to the individual or organisation to use this standard to identify what metadata elements to capture. Metadata schemas can be based on standards, creating a more specific metadata structure within the perameters of a standard. 

Metadata standards are created by a particular knowledge or data community. There is usually some form of governance or organisation around a standard so they can be actively maintained and reviewed, allowing the standard to grow and evolve in response to the community who will be using it. While there are a few cross-discipline standards, they are mostly discipline specific. 

Standards can often specify:
- Which metadata elements are required and which are recommended
- Which controlled vocabularies to use
- The input type (e.g. ...) for the metadata element

>[!NOTE]
> Should we provide an example of a metadata schema that is based on a standard?
> Information taken from FAIRwDDI - reference once released and link to resource 

---

## Metadata schemas

Metadata schemas are a blueprint for describing your data. They specify what metadata elements to use and what information they should descibe. They may also state what controlled vocabularies to use.

Organisations or individuals may create a schema. The same schema could be used widely by many research projects, or by a single research project.

For example:
- An individual may create their own metadata schema for a particular project
- An individual may use a publicly available schema to create metadata for their porject
- An organisation may have an internal schema so anyone documenting information about a resource will capture the same metadata elements
- A public repository may have a schema and require anyone wishing to deposit their data to use their schema

>[!NOTE]
> BO - Suggest removing the sentence "The same schema could be used widely by many research projects, or by a single research project." as it sort of repeats in the following bullet points. Could change the sentence before it to something like "Organisations or individuals may create schemas for personal, internal or public use", so it links to the examples.<p></p>
> Maybe we should start with standards, as they're like the broader framework that encompass schemas?

>[!NOTE]
> Need to review this definition of schemas.
> KR Q: is the first point correct?
> A way of describing a standard using an established format such as XML, JSON etc.
> Inerpretation of a standard (sometimes), can have independent schema 

---

## Types of metadata standards

Different types of metadata standards

- General cross-discipline metadata standards, for example:
  - Dublin Core
  - DataCite
  - PBCore is a standard for describing sound and moving images.
  - schema.org
 
>[!NOTE]
> BO - I think if you're saying what one of the standards are for we should add a bit more detail to the rest?
    
- Discipline specific metadata standards, for example:
  - Data Documentation Initiative (DDI): DDI is an international standard for describing social science datasets which includes a metadata specification, controlled vocabularies, and tools for working with DDI metadata.

>[!NOTE]
> BO - Suggest chaning "social science datasets" to "social science data" as it can be used to describe other things such as questionnaires.

  - Categories for the Description of Works of Art (CDWA): CDWA is a standard for the description of art, architecture, and other cultural works.
  - NeXus: NeXus is an international standard for neutron, x-ray, and muon experiment data.

>[!NOTE]
> Notes from discussion with JJ: <p></p>
> Dublin Core is a standard expressed as a schema <p></p>
> Schema is name, label, description and relationship between metadata elements (description and structure) <p></p>
> Schema is technical description of a standard - it will normally be in XML, JSON <p></p>
> Schemas separates metadata element information from the actual metadata <p></p>
> Standard is the whole thing <p></p>
> Are dublin core and datacite known as a schema or a standard?
> Metadata schemas provide similar clarification to metadata elements that contolled vocabularies do for metadata fields
> Schemas constrict meaning of metadata element
> **REVIEW** (doesn't necessarily belong here) Exercise - CSV file (name of column), database schema (name of column and data format), SPSS/STATA/SAS file (data, codelist, label of column but doesn't include relationships), DDI file

---
## Why should we standardise our data?

Imagine you had a phone charger which had the plug below. Say you wanted to plug it into socket at a train station in Leeds, do you think it would work?

_[ADD IMAGE OF 3 PIN PLUG]_

With the same electrical plug, do you think it would work if you wanted to charge your phone at a library in Southampton? Or a cafe in Cardiff? Or at your home?

How do we know that the same socket will work in all the different places?

>[!NOTE]
> Standardisation increases efficiency and simplifies workflows
> Economic of scale argument

>[!NOTE]
> BO - I like the anaology. Can look at this section once it's finalised.

---
## Why should we use standards?

You know you will be able to charge your phone in any location of the UK as all three-pin plugs distributed in the UK follow a manufacturing standard. This standard means all plugs will have the correct dimensions and functionality to work with any UK socket. The details of this standard is set out by an organisation called the International Organization for Standardization in their standard [ISO 4400:1994](https://www.iso.org/standard/20509.html). Through bringing together experts in relevant fields, they develop and distribute the standard.

What would happen if we didn't have this standard?

---

## Benefits of metadata standards

Through standardising metadata structure and terminology, standards enable the exchange of metadata between people and organisations (interoperability). For example, people are able to organise metadata from multiple studies in a coherent and efficient way. Moreover, through being standardised, metadata is machine actionable, meaning you can search and filter metadata as needed. This increased exchange improves the discoverability of research and encourages cross-study comparison and secondary research (re-usability).

Moreover, the machine actionability of metadata
- Makes data more FAIR by increasing the quality of the metadata
  - Promotes interoperability of metadata
  - By enabling cross-study comparison and secondary research, metadata standards support data re-usability
- Saves researchers time in metadata creation as set rules have already put in place

>[!NOTE]
> BO - I think the second part is a WIP so can review once it's done.
---

## Case study: Cross study comparison

- [The rise of the obesity epidemic](https://learning.closer.ac.uk/researchcasestudies/the-rise-of-the-obesity-epidemic/)
  - Uses data from five studies:
    - MRC National Survey of Health and Development (1946 British birth cohort)
    - National Child Development Study (1958 British birth cohort)
    - 1970 British Cohort Study
    - Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children
    - Millennium Cohort Study

- [Childhood environment and adult mental well-being](https://learning.closer.ac.uk/researchcasestudies/childhood-environment-and-adult-mental-well-being/)
  - Uses data from three studies:
    - MRC National Survey of Health and Development
    - 1958 National Child Development Study
    - 1970 British Cohort Study

>[!NOTE]
> What would be the most useful case study/ies to use here?
> Add context information
> Pick one case study to show utility of standard

>[!NOTE]
> BO - What are we actually going to be asking people to do or look at here?

---

## How to find the right metadata standard for your research

You can use metadata standard catalogues to search for the standard most relevant for your research.

These sites include:
- [Metadata standards catalogue](https://rdamsc.bath.ac.uk/subject-index)
- [DDC Metadata standards guideline](https://www.dcc.ac.uk/guidance/standards/metadata)

>[!NOTE]
> BO - Needs an intro sentence, something like "So now we know what metadata standards are, and how they can enable our (meta)data to be interoperable and reusable, but how can you find the right standard for your research?".
---

## Case study (practice): Finding a metadata standard

Which metadata standard would you choose for this research project?

Using [Metadata standards catalogue](https://rdamsc.bath.ac.uk/subject-index) or the [DDC Metadata standards guideline](https://www.dcc.ac.uk/guidance/standards/metadata) identify a relevant metadata standard to use for this research.

_[Description of research project - discipline, area of enquiry]_

>[!NOTE]
> We would then explain what metadata standard we picked for this dataset and give the reasoning behind it (e.g. popular in the discipline, expansive, relevant etc.)

---

## Case study (answer): Finding a metadata standard

This is the metadata standard we chose.

Reasons behind this choice:
- [give the thought process behind choosing that particular metadata standard]

---

## Application: Find a metadata standard for your research

Now you have practised finding a relevant metadata standard, find a metadata standard for you research.

---

## Test your knowledge


