---
title: Unit 2.6 Creating metadata, study
author: Kate Reed
date: April 09, 2025
---

## Intended learning outcomes 

- Understand what study level metadata is and why it is important
- Understand who needs to create study level metadata
- Understand how we can create study level metadata
- Know how to implement best practice (metadata standards and controlled vocabularies) in study level metadata

---
## Outline

- What is study level metadata and why is it important (recap)
- What types of metadata does it include
- Who needs to create study level metadata?
- When do we create study metadata?
- How do we create study metadata?
- Where do we store and find study metadata?

---
## What is study level metadata?

Thinking about to 'Metadata in research' unit, what is study level metadata?

What types of metadata would study level metadata include? 

What metadata elements might you include?

---
## Study level metadata elements

Study level metadata often includes descriptive, administrative and technical metadata.

For example, you could include: 

- Title of study
- Date the data was collected
- Creator of the data
- Location of data collected
- Format the data is in

---
## Who should create study level metadata and when should you create it?

**Everyone should create study level metadata.** Creating study level metadata from the beinging of your research project ill save you time in the long-term. Adding to and updating your study level metadata as you go along will further allow you to document any changes to the study throughout the project.

To begin with, you can create study level metadata in an excel spreadsheet stored alongside your data files.

What metadata elements you capture will depend on what you want to do with your research. If you want to share your research widely then you may need to include more study level information than if you just want to document for your own use and personal reference.

What tools can we use to help create study level metadata and implement best practice?

---
## Metadata standards

Using a metadata schema or standard can help make our study level metadata interoperable.

Schemas and standards can also help us identify what metadata to create as they often specifcy what metadata elements o capture.

What schema or standard to use depends on your research. You can select a discipline specific standard or an inter-disciplinary standard.

If you want to deposit your data or metadata in a repository, the repository may require you to adhere to a specific schema or standard. It is important to idenitfy this at the begining of your research so you know what information to collect.


---
## Metadata standards: Dublin Core

Dublin Core is a inter-disciplinary schema that is commonly used in different research projects. It contains 15 core elements.

While there is no universally agreed set of minimum metadata, DUblin Core is a useful guideline for creating a strong basis of study level metadata.

Note, not all the metadata elements may be relevant for your research. However, using Dublin Core is a good starting point for identifying what sort of metadata to create.

---
## Dublin Core Simple Metadata Generator

While you can create Dublin Core metadata in an excel spreadsheet yourself, Dublin Core also provide an online generator where you can input your research information and export metadata in a machine-readable file. 

Create study level metadata using [Dublin Core Simple Generator](https://nsteffel.github.io/dublin_core_generator/generator_nq.html)

>[!NOTE]
> Should we provide an example case study to create metadata for? E.g. provide information for a research study which participants can read and then create the metadata for using the generator. We can then provide answers. This may be useful as we can also show how you can create metadata in different ways if you don't use controlled vocabularies. This will then lead to the Advanced generator.
> We can also do an activity for participants to use simple generator for their own research.

---
## Benefits of Dublin Core Simple Metadata Generator 

How does using the Dublin Core schema help our metadata creation?

- Defines what metadata elements to capture
  - The 15 core elements provide a strong basis of what metadata to create
- Gives definitions of the metadata elements and what sort of data to input into the metadata fields
  - Each metadata element is linked to a new page providing a definition of the metadata element/field
  - For example, for names they recommend to put family name then first name. For dates, they recommend YYYY-MM-DD format 

---
## Challenges Dublin Core Simple Metadata Generator

What do you think some of the challenges could be around the metadata created by the simple generator?
What tools do you think we could use to enhance metadata best practice?

---
## Challenges Dublin Core Simple Metadata Generator

While there are some guidelines as to what to you can put in each metadata field, the simple generator does not refer to controlled vocabularies.

This means metadata can be presented in different ways. This could decrease the quality of your metadata as well as it's interoperability. 

For some input fields, controlled vocabularies may not be necessary. However, othe input fields it may be very useful in ensuring metadata is standardised and clear to understand.
- What are some of the metadata fields that you think could benefit from using controlled vocabularies?

---
## Example: unstandardised metadata

>[!NOTE]
> Provide an example of how the language or location can be presented in different ways

---
## Dublin Core Advanced Metadata Generator

Now explore the[Dublin Core Advanced Metadata Generator](https://nsteffel.github.io/dublin_core_generator/generator.html). 

- What feautres and tools does it include in order to improve the quality of the metadata recorded?
- What's the difference between the Simple Generator and Advanced Generator?
- What tools does the Advanced Generator use that helps create metadata best practice?

---
## Dublin Core Advanced Metadata Generator

For some fields, the Advanced Generator provides provides a list of controlled vocabularies that you could use and gives us you the functionality to specify which one you choose. 
- _screenshot an example_

It provides a space to further specify the metadata element in order to avoid confusion
- _screenshot an example_


---

