---
title: Unit 2.7 Using metadata, Discover and understand data
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Hayley Mills, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed
date: April 09, 2025
---

## Intended learning outcomes 

- Understand how to use a codebook to understand a dataset
- Know how to search data repositories (UK Data Service, CESSDA Data catalogue)
- Understand the role of metadata in enabling search/filter

---
## Outline

- Using metadata to discover data
- Practise searching and filtering with keywords / variables
- Using metadata to understand data

---

## Using metadata to discover and understand data

How do you think we could use metadata to _discover_ research? 

How do you you think we could use metadata to _understand_ research?

---
## Discovering data

How do we discover data?

Find a research study that corresponds with the information below.

_[Activity: give information about research and ask people to spend time trying to find the research page. Don't specify where to look or how to go about it. Reflect on what they did to try and find this dataset e.g. go online, use a data catalogue or (meta)data repository. Then provide explanation of how we find it - e.g. go to relevant catalogue/repository site, use the search/filter functions, use the dataset page to understand whether it's a match.]_

>[!NOTE]
> Need to choose which research study / dataset to use for this activity. I think maybe one for UK data service.

---
## Discovering research: catalogue and repositories

Data catalogue and data repositories are sometimes used interchangeably, however they are different tools.

What is the difference between a data respository and a data catalogue?
Can you describe the different features and aims?

Let's start with definition for a data catalogue and a data repository.

UK Data Service describes a data repository as 'a centralised database system that collects, manages, and stores datasets for later use'. They are design for long-term storage of datasets so they can be managed and accessed through the repository. Repositories may use metadata on dataset pagesto give an overview of the research and/or use metadata to enable a filter or search function.

CoData defines a data catalogue as a 'curated collection of metadata records describing datasets and their data elements. Curated and organised using a formal metadata schema appropriate to data and data sets (e.g. ReCollect etc).'. Sometimes a data catalogue is referred to as a metadata repository. Note this is different from a data repository which stores the actual datasets.

The main difference between the two tools is that a data repository will store the actual data whereas a catalogue will store the metadata records only. Commonly, data repositories and data catalogues will specify what metadata they require through a schema (often based on a relevant metadata standard).

Data catalogue and data repositories can be cross-discpline or discipline specific. So, how can you find the right data catalogue and data repository for your area of interest? 

_[Point to resources where people can search and find data catalogue and repositories - re3data, FAIRSharing]_

Now, using the resource above, find data catalogues and/or repositories that are relevant to your area of interest or research.

>[!NOTE]
> Is it important to define between the two? If so, is the above differentiation correct? <p></p>
> KR question: are metadata repositories a distinct thing from data repositories? If so, what is that distinction? I will add metadata repositories as a separate tool into this unit if it is. <p></p>
> We could show the same study shown in the UK Data Service and CLOSER to show the differences in the information they provide? <p></p>
> Maybe we should also specify the difference between data repositories and metadata repositories? <p></p>
> Need resources where you can search catalogues and repositories - FAIRSharing

---
## The role of metadata in catalogues and repositories

_[Add information here about how metadata enables catalogues and repositories to be interactive. We are able to search and filter. Let people know how they can find catalogues]_

>[!NOTE]
> This might be repetition on previous exercises that we have done - particularly linked to unit on CV. Maybe this unit needs to be moved to earlier on in the course?

---

## Discovery to understanding 

Now imagine you have used the search and filter functions to find a list of research projects that may be of interest to you.
However, when you click through to the resource you are taken straight to this.

_[Provide a screenshot of a research profile page with very little metadata]_

Or if the data is open, straight to the dataset.

_[Provide a screenshot of a dataset with no accompanying documentation]_

What challenges might arise if we only had this information to work from?
Would you choose to cite or use this dataset in your work? Why?
Would you trust these sources?

---

## Discovery to understanding: the role of metadata

Without strong documentation on data catalogue and repository sites, we're not able to easily understand what the research project is about. We have to contact the research producers to clarify details about the research project or we decide not to use the data as we cannot be sure how it was produced or what data it's contains.

This where metadata comes in. Metadata gives us the information to explain what the research project is about, how it delivered and what it's dataset(s) descrive.

---

## Understanding research: research profile pages

So, when we then click through to a particular research or dataset page on a repository or catalogue, we are taken to their profile page. This page presents us with more information about that project. For example:

_[Provide a screenshot of a research profile on a catalogue/repository. Also provide a link to this page.]_

Looking at the page above, what sort of information does the metadata tell us about the project?

Now take some time to look at the whole repository and catalogue. Click into the profiles of different research projects. 
What can you observe about the documentation/information around different research projects? Is it similar or different? Does it use the same structure?

---
## Metadata as structured documentation 

Data catalogues and repositories will often ask research projects wishing to list or deposit their data to submit a certain level of metadata. The repository or catalogue will specify what the minimum metadata requirements are so the same level of information is provided for all resources. Through standardising the level of metadata across the resources, people using the repository or catalogue to find relevant research will get an even experience and be able to search efficiently. Having this standardised level of information also helps us to build trust in the data catalogue or repository as well as trust the research projects that are stored on the site. 

We also look at other tools that catalogues, repositories or independent research projects may also use to standardise their metadata.

>[!NOTE]
> Again, now wondering whether this unit should be moved up so we can let people explore the use of metadata before going into CV and metadata standards as best practice so we can refer back to this activity as a practical basis

---
## Understanding datasets

As we discussed, research data profiles often give us high-level information around the research project: the who, what, where, when and why.

However, if you were asked to describe what was in the dataset, would you be able to do it?

For example, if you looked at the research project profile below from a data repository, what could you tell someone about the actual data it collected?

[Give link to research project profile page].

Would you be able to describe what variables are within the dataset? Or how many cases it recorded for each variable?

>[!NOTE]
> Need to be concious here of the fact metadata repositories will list variables directly within the repository so you can search and filter them.

---
## Understanding dataset: differences in catalogue and repositories in understanding 

As we  looked at in Unit 2.2, metadata can also describe the data within a dataset.

On data repositories, we are able to search metadata about the data, searching and filtering to find specific variables for example.
_[Give example of variable search tools]_

Research projects may also provide additional documentation stored alongside datasets called Codebooks or data dictionaries. These can be stored on data repository and catalogue sites. 

>[!NOTE]
> KR Q: want to check, on the UK data service, is the data catalogue separate to the [variable and question bank](https://discover.ukdataservice.ac.uk/variables)? So within UK data service website, they have both a data catalogue and a data repository

---

## Understanding research: Codebooks and data dictionaries

Codebooks and data dictionaries are sometimes used interchangeably however they are different tools.

UK Data Service defines a Codebook as a document that 'describes the contents, structure, and layout of a data collection. Codebooks begin with basic front matter, including the study title, name of the principal investigator(s), table of contents, and an introduction describing the purpose and format of the codebook. Some codebooks also include methodological details, such as how weights were computed, and data collection instruments, while others, especially with larger or more complex data collections, leave those details for a separate user guide and/or data collection instrument.'

CoData defines Data dictionary as a 'collection of descriptions of the data objects or items in a data model. After each data object or item is given a descriptive name, its relationship is described (or it becomes part of some structure that implicitly describes relationship), the type of data (such as text or image or binary value) is described, possible predefined values are listed, and a brief textual description is provided. This collection can be organised for reference into a data dictionary.'

_[ADD A CLEAR LINE ABOUT THE MAIN DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE TWO]_

>[!NOTE]
> Is it necessary to differentiate between Codebook and Data Dictionary in this course? If so, what is the difference we would like to identify? The terms are used interchangeably by many orgs so would be good to get a clear understanding of this as I'm struggling

---

## Using Codebooks and data dictionaries

_In progress section_

Add information about:
- Where you can find codebooks/data dictionaries and how you can access them
- Give an example of a codebook/data dictionary and ask what information you can gain from them (do this as a tiered activity e.g. link people to the resarch profile page first and ask them whether they can infomration around different variables. Then provide the link to the codebook or data dictionary)

---

## NOTES TO ADD ABOVE

CESSDA - only possible because they are using the same standard
Enables you to search across multiple archives

WorldCat - library, indexes all the libraries 

---
