---
title: Unit 2.7 Introduction summary
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed
date: November 05, 2025
---
# Unit 2.7 Introduction summary

## Overview

### Unit study time
30 minutes

### Intended Learning Outcome
By the end of the unit, you will ...

- Identify the key takeaways from the Introduction Course
- Explain the main benefits of metadata for data owners, data users and research as a whole
- Identify tools that help metadata creation and management
  
### Outline

>[!NOTE]
>HM - Potential key messages/takeaways (we should make sure they are clear throughout the course) e.g. <br>
- Metadata is key to reseach data managament and trustworthy reusable research <br>
- Creating metadata early in the reserach life cycle and consistently saves time and improves quality <br>
- something about standards and/or FAIR? <br>
- Something about sustainable reserach and reducing waste? <br>
- Metadata is not a nice-to-have, it is an asset that can be expoilted to your advantage
  
---

## Defining metadata

## How is metadata used in research 

How does metadata help us discover data?

**Discovery**
Metadata powers data catalogues which are a key discovery tool in research. On these sites, a large number of studies are listed so people can find past studies for their own work, whether to reference or to use as secondary data. Without metadata, we wouldn't be able to search or filter these sites, intstead we would have to scroll through hundreds of pages and click into every individual record to find studies that relevant for our work. As metadata is machine readable and machine actionable, it helps organise all the studies on a data catalogues and provides us with the data to filter and search.

How does metadata help us understand data?

**Understanding**
As a structured form of data documentation, metadata gives the context of a study. It explains the who, what, where, why and how of the data. Without this, we wouldn't know what data a study has collected or, if we have the study's dataset, we would struggle to interpet the data as it would just appear to be numbers or text with no meaning. By providing extra information that wouldn't otherwise be captured in the dataset, metadata helps researchers understand how the data was produced and how to interpet the data once they have the dataset. 

How does metadata help us reuse data?

<b>Reuse</b>
By helping people discover and understand existing research, metadata helps people reuse existing data. Without metadata, we might not know a study in our area of interest has been conducted and we run the risk of duplicating research. By making these studies findable and understandable, metadata to helps us resue data, saving us time, money and resources.

A dataset created for one research question might also contain data valuable for a completely different enquiry. This may not be obvious when reading about an overall study however metadata, such as variable descriptions, makes these connections visible. People can then identify these opportunities and repurpose existing data, meaning we maximise the potential of data.

By documenting the provenance of data, metadata helps maintain the credibility and trustworthiness of data so it can be used reliably to support other research enquiries. 




## Why create metadata 

What's the benefit of creating metadata for a data owner?
For yourself

What's the benefit of creating metadata for a data user?

For others

Who else might require you to create metadata?

Because it is required
